[Amit Varma]: Something I go on about all the time is how we take the present for granted when it is
[Amit Varma]: so, so contingent. Take India, for example. We think of India as a fixed geographical
[Amit Varma]: entity, almost as something inevitable, something meant to be, and now as something permanent.
[Amit Varma]: But we are a recent nation, born out of circumstance and happenstance, maintained perhaps by inertia.
[Amit Varma]: When India gained independence in 1947, this India that we now inhabit was anything but
[Amit Varma]: inevitable. In fact, at times it must have seemed so unlikely. It wasn't just a question
[Amit Varma]: of holding British India together after splitting it in two. There were almost 600 princely
[Amit Varma]: states, all with their own agreements with the British, many of whom wanted to join neither
[Amit Varma]: India nor Pakistan, but just to get their independence back. And since our whole freedom
[Amit Varma]: struggle was a battle for independence from the British, who could grudge them this? Some
[Amit Varma]: of them, even though they were deep within present-day India, wanted to be part of Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: Using force on these princely states would not have gone down well with the international
[Amit Varma]: community, so they had to be persuaded to join India of their own free will. Our founders
[Amit Varma]: had a few weeks before independence to accomplish this task, which seemed almost impossible.
[Amit Varma]: Hundreds of princely states, how do you get them all to sign on the dotted line? How do
[Amit Varma]: you even find the time to speak to all of them? How do you accommodate the separate
[Amit Varma]: demands, especially when Pakistan is also playing mischief in the background? A balkanization
[Amit Varma]: of India seemed inevitable, but it did not happen. Step by step, the country we now know
[Amit Varma]: as India was politically constructed by a handful of men. One of them, of course, is
[Amit Varma]: Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, but his right-hand man, B.P. Medan, is today a footnote in most
[Amit Varma]: history books, despite being arguably as important as Patel in bringing us all together. If B.P.
[Amit Varma]: Medan did not exist, we may have been living in a different India.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Narayani Basu, author of the fine
[Amit Varma]: book, B.P. Medan, The Unsung Architect of Modern India. This is a fitting subject for
[Amit Varma]: a show called The Scene and the Unseen, because B.P. Medan really is one of those unseen heroes
[Amit Varma]: whose contribution to our history is outsized. Well, unseen no more. Narayani's book is available
[Amit Varma]: at your nearest bookstore, and by all accounts, it's already a bestseller. And Narayani is
[Amit Varma]: right here with me on the show. Before we get to our conversation, though, let's take
[Amit Varma]: a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive. The Scene and the Unseen has been a labor of love for me. I've enjoyed putting
[Amit Varma]: together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours
[Amit Varma]: as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off
[Amit Varma]: the show. Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really
[Amit Varma]: woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself. Scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel, and so on. So, well, I'm trying a new way
[Amit Varma]: of keeping this thing going, and that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every
[Amit Varma]: episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish
[Amit Varma]: lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: slash support, and contributing an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep the scene going. sceneunseen.in slash
[Unknown]: support.
[Amit Varma]: Rani, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you. Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we get to this fascinating book, that's clearly been a labor of love
[Amit Varma]: for you. Tell me a little bit about yourself. You know, what are you? What's your training?
[Guest]: What's your education like?
[Guest]: So I have basically majored in history. I went to Stevens, I majored in history, I then
[Guest]: switched to international relations. I didn't really know what I wanted to do post history.
[Guest]: I knew I didn't want to get into conventional academics. I didn't want to do a PhD. I didn't
[Guest]: want to teach. I also didn't want to sit for the civil services. But I really enjoyed studying
[Guest]: about international relations, about how countries interacted with each other, diplomats interacted
[Guest]: with each other. So I switched to international relations. I majored in Chinese foreign policy.
[Guest]: I specialized in US-China relations. I completed my academics up to my MPhil, and thereafter
[Guest]: I just I dropped out of academia 100%. I didn't want to continue to do a PhD. I took up a
[Guest]: job as a research analyst with the Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies, where I worked
[Guest]: for a couple of years as a China research analyst. It wasn't something that gave me
[Guest]: a lot of joy because it was not the kind of interaction with international relations that
[Guest]: I actually wanted to do. And at that point, I wasn't very clear about what that meant
[Guest]: either. I just knew that I wasn't very pleased with what I was doing. I also knew that I
[Guest]: wanted to write and research a lot more than the job was actually giving me the scope to
[Guest]: do. So I quit my job. This was about six years ago. I quit my job and I turned to writing
[Guest]: full time and research full time. And coincidentally, that is also the track that brought me on
[Guest]: to writing VP Menon because at that point I was reading. I've always been a lover of
[Guest]: nonfiction. I've read a lot of political and historical nonfiction biographies primarily.
[Guest]: And I was at that point reading a lot about modern Indian history, about how the transfer
[Guest]: of power came about, etc. And I would see VP Menon's name. And let me just make it clear.
[Guest]: I did not know at this point, VP Menon was my great grandfather.
[Amit Varma]: You did not know at this point?
[Guest]: No, I didn't know. So this is not something that we discussed effusively at all. My mother
[Guest]: never and indeed members of my family didn't ever bring me up to know who VP Menon was.
[Guest]: There was no constant eulogising of this was who your great grandfather was. But we are
[Guest]: a family who loves to read and we like to discuss books. So I was discussing a particular
[Guest]: book, I forget which, on the transfer of power. And I was mentioning VP Menon, who was perennially
[Guest]: referred to as in Mountbatten's able reforms commissioner, etc. And at that point I was
[Guest]: in my mid 20s. And my mother looked at me and she said, you do know that he was your
[Guest]: great grandfather. And that was the first time that I'd heard of him. And that completely,
[Guest]: it intrigued me a lot because I wanted to immediately know more about this person. And
[Guest]: I began to try and look him up. And I found nothing apart from his very seminal books,
[Guest]: the transfer of power and the story of the integration of the states. But those are written
[Guest]: in very academic, very concise prose. They reveal nothing. They give nothing away about
[Guest]: what kind of man this person was. And there was nothing else. There was no biography.
[Guest]: There was no autobiography. There was nothing. And I began to become more and more interested
[Guest]: in this person and trying to find out what kind of person this was. And that I have to
[Guest]: say it happened simultaneously with me losing interest in a typical desk job. So when I
[Guest]: dropped out, when I quit my job, this seemed like the natural thing to do, to research
[Guest]: who VP Menon was and what I wanted to do as far as writing his life was concerned. Did
[Guest]: I want to write a complete biography? Did I want to explore it into more of a political
[Guest]: biography? What did I want to do? It was the first time that I'd actually started playing
[Guest]: around with ideas like that. And that gave me a lot of joy. It gave me great freedom
[Guest]: to think. It gave me a lot of scope to sort of expand my horizons more. And actually how
[Guest]: I began writing this book and how I came to this point.
[Amit Varma]: And so, you know, you get drawn into the stories of he's because obviously a lot of the popular
[Amit Varma]: books that we read about our history will mention him. He is Mountbatten's reforms commissioner.
[Amit Varma]: He is, you know, Patel's right hand man in the state's department. But when you actually
[Amit Varma]: decide that you want to write a history of the guy, and you also decide that it's going
[Amit Varma]: to be a sort of a comprehensive history, not just his political career, it's going to include
[Amit Varma]: little things like how he ran away from home and went to school when he was 13 years old.
[Amit Varma]: What are the kind of sources that you then look at? Because you have the unique position
[Amit Varma]: of not just having access to the family, but his family is your family. So you've got a
[Amit Varma]: unique kind of access there. But apart from that, how do you then go about looking for
[Amit Varma]: sources? What kind of access do you need for that? Were there good primary sources left?
[Guest]: So in terms of his professional life, there was plenty of access. And this happened in
[Guest]: a sort of layered way because he's left behind a collection of his professional papers, rather,
[Guest]: which are housed at Teen Moorthy. Now, these have nothing to do with his personal life.
[Guest]: They are just basically his career in government service. And that is the V.P. Menon collection.
[Guest]: Apart from that, I also had to go through the professional papers of nearly everyone
[Guest]: who was involved in the transfer of power. So Batten, Nehru, Krishna Menon, the Sardar
[Guest]: Patel correspondence, because in every one of these people's correspondence, in between
[Guest]: the pages, there were different memos, there were letters written by V.P. to these guys,
[Guest]: and these guys were corresponding with him in turn, which have merited footnotes in transfer
[Guest]: of power narratives, but never really been looked at. So these, to me, were also a huge
[Guest]: insight into how this man was thinking. So that was one source.
[Guest]: As far as his personal life was concerned, I hit several roadblocks because he was a
[Guest]: very, very fiercely private man. He was not somebody who was an eloquent diarist or an
[Guest]: eloquent letter writer. He left behind very few instances of how he felt at a particular
[Guest]: point, of how he experienced his own personal, for instance, his arrival in Delhi and stuff
[Guest]: like that. There are letters that have been left few and far between. There are letters
[Guest]: that were left to his stepdaughter, Meenakshi Anantan. One or two letters have survived
[Guest]: that were left to his brother, to whom he was extremely close. And he was the eldest
[Guest]: of seven siblings. So he was very close to one particular younger brother with whom he
[Amit Varma]: used to correspond.
[Amit Varma]: I thought he was the oldest boy. He had an elder sister who got married? Or am I confused?
[Guest]: He had, his elder sister is not really talked about because she died long before he was.
[Amit Varma]: So effectively, he was the oldest.
[Guest]: So effectively, he was the eldest of the family. And these were letters that didn't allow me
[Guest]: much insight into the man as such because he very rarely talked about, for instance,
[Guest]: his transition from boyhood to manhood. You know, when he talked about his arrival in
[Guest]: Delhi, it was only at a specific point in time. So he wasn't very vocal about things
[Guest]: like that, about his emotions, about his feelings. So it was a labor, I have to say, a long,
[Guest]: long labor because in the process of this, I've had to connect to members of the Vapala
[Guest]: clan whom I didn't know at all. Because when VP left Kerala and when he ran away to Kolar
[Guest]: and moved to Delhi and Simla, he used to return to Kerala, but he never really returned to
[Guest]: settle in Kerala. He retired in Bangalore.
[Guest]: So his children grew up out of the main Tarawad, which by the way, still exists, but nobody
[Guest]: ever really returned, at least not from my family. So there was no touch that was maintained
[Guest]: between members of his children's families, for instance, his siblings' families. There
[Guest]: was no contact that was maintained. And this was in the days before emails and telephones
[Guest]: and mobiles and stuff like that. So to try and hunt them down was extremely difficult.
[Guest]: It was a matter of chance that I actually discovered somebody via Twitter, actually,
[Guest]: who actually led me to look at Kochi and Arunakulam, where I discovered his brother's children
[Guest]: are still living there. So it brought me home in many ways. It's brought me back to my roots
[Guest]: in ways that I didn't think was possible. The entire clan actually pulled together and
[Guest]: retrieved old letters or scraps of information, photographs, which are now in the book, which
[Guest]: have existed and allowed me to piece together really painstakingly the story of this man
[Guest]: from nothing, you know, because he was so completely, almost as if he lived in a little
[Guest]: bubble in which there was his immediate family, and there was his job. And very rarely did
[Guest]: he go beyond that. He loved his brother, he adored his mother, but he was not somebody
[Guest]: who was very vocal about his emotional life, nor was he someone who was particularly sentimental.
[Guest]: So he didn't leave behind any trace of a softer side of VP. In fact, the only soft side that
[Guest]: I could find was his great love for his second wife, and his immense love for his stepdaughter,
[Guest]: Meenakshi. And surprisingly, he has been very vocal there. So that was the only soft side
[Guest]: of VP that I could find. And it's been a search that's intrigued me a lot, because I don't
[Guest]: think it's this hard to piece together someone's life. And yet, it's been incredibly difficult.
[Guest]: His first marriage, for instance, there is little to no information that survives about
[Guest]: who he married. We just have a first name, Susheela. We don't even have a last name.
[Guest]: We don't know what family she came from. We know vaguely that she was from the same village.
[Guest]: We don't know what she looked like. There are no photographs, there are no letters.
[Guest]: There is nothing that survives. We don't know why that marriage broke down. We know that
[Guest]: it wasn't a particularly happy marriage, and that's about all we know. We know that there
[Guest]: were two sons from that marriage. I am descended from her eldest son. And beyond that, we know
[Guest]: nothing else. Why this marriage broke down in 1935, why it broke down, we don't know.
[Guest]: We know that there was no attempt to contact her sons after she left. If there was, either
[Guest]: those letters were intercepted and then destroyed, because nothing survives today. That to me
[Guest]: spoke of a rather ruthless side of VP. It was not a side that I personally identify
[Guest]: with. Certainly, it was a side that his children never understood. It was also an aspect that
[Guest]: impacted his children for years, if not all of their lives, because my grandfather was
[Guest]: about nine when the marriage broke apart. His brother was seven, and they were young.
[Guest]: But I mean, to have this happen, and at that scale, when you're that young, or indeed when
[Guest]: you're any age, is life changing for you. And, you know, he never, never remembered
[Guest]: his mother. And that's another aspect that I found bizarre, because obviously, the hurt
[Guest]: of his mother's exit impacted him so deeply that he never had any memory of what she was
[Amit Varma]: like. So there are no memories of...
[Amit Varma]: This was at the context, she basically disappeared one day, and she never got in touch again.
[Amit Varma]: And you have a moving story in your book about how some 30 years later...
[Guest]: Yes. My mother remembered that story. It was something she never forgot. They were in a
[Guest]: busy marketplace. And suddenly he said, there's my mother right there. And he ran out of the
[Guest]: shop, and it was a busy street outside. And the woman who had stored some instinct in
[Guest]: him had disappeared. But to me, that was incredibly poignant, because it spoke of a little boy
[Guest]: who never stopped looking for his mother. And it also speaks to me of the kind of hurt
[Guest]: a parent is capable of inflicting on their children. And I have tried to put down the
[Guest]: story in complete full as much as I know it, because I don't believe that even if you do
[Guest]: have a cruel streak, if you have a particularly ruthless streak, that that should be set aside.
[Guest]: Because to me, it spoke a lot about the fact that this was a man who went on to do wonderful
[Guest]: things for this country, but was capable of immense cruelty in his personal life. He was
[Guest]: not a very good father to his sons. He was very emotionally distant. They grew up craving
[Guest]: his love, his approval. They always wanted his validation. And strangely, they called
[Guest]: him sir, which again spoke of a very stern, formal aspect of the paternal relationship.
[Guest]: On the other hand, he adored his stepdaughter. She was with him when he died. He wanted everything
[Guest]: after he was dead to be left to her. And she adored him in turn. So he was obviously a
[Guest]: very complex man. So to try and deconstruct that from next to nothing has been hard, very,
[Guest]: very hard.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd say, you know, when I was reading the book, I thought, okay, there are two sort
[Amit Varma]: of challenges in front of you. And one which you've just elaborated upon is when so little
[Amit Varma]: is known of his personal life, and there's nothing left. And he was not really a person
[Amit Varma]: who wrote personal letters or stayed in touch with his family. How do you piece a personal
[Amit Varma]: life together? That's one challenge. But the other challenge is actually with his political
[Amit Varma]: and public life, which is a challenge of figuring out with your additional material, what sense
[Amit Varma]: to make of the conflicting narratives. Because in a lot of the key moments in history, like
[Amit Varma]: for example, his relationship with Mountbatten, Mountbatten was a self aggrandizing man who
[Amit Varma]: took credit for everything. In fact, what is now called the Mountbatten plan, as you
[Unknown]: pointed out, was drafted by men in years before Mountbatten even came to India. It's called
[Amit Varma]: the Men in Plan. And you know, so Mountbatten made it a point to try and take credit for
[Amit Varma]: everything that was happening in a similar sense. Patel was given a lot of the credit
[Amit Varma]: for the behind the scenes work that VP did. There are all kinds of conflicting accounts
[Amit Varma]: of what's really going on there, because there are the egos of all these big players on the
[Amit Varma]: stage, and they're all putting forward their side of the story. Was that a sort of challenge
[Amit Varma]: for you that how do you build a coherent narrative out of this? Because VP is obviously also
[Amit Varma]: got his strong points of view when it comes to all of this. And at times they don't match
[Guest]: up with the others. So how do you make sense of that?
[Guest]: That was something that I found, I initially thought of this as a challenge, right? Because
[Guest]: essentially, though he never sat for his ICS examinations, this guy was a bureaucrat. How
[Guest]: do you make a bureaucrat stand out political giants? You know, he is walking among legends.
[Guest]: He is at a point which is a crossroads in India's modern history. How do you make somebody,
[Guest]: and it's so easy to stereotype a bureaucrat, right? You think of them as a babu pushing
[Guest]: paper. And it was a fascinating aspect for me, because when you're talking, when you're
[Guest]: talking on independence movement, you don't necessarily like to think of it as paperwork,
[Guest]: personnel shortages, transfers of personnel. You don't like to think of it like that because
[Guest]: it's generally, it's a boring aspect. You know, revolution generally makes you think
[Guest]: of bloodshed and stirring speeches and wonderful leaders. You don't think of the civil servants
[Guest]: who are actually doing the work behind the scenes. So my greatest fear was how do I pull
[Guest]: out VP Menon from the shadows of the kind of history he was involved with, from the
[Guest]: kind of people he was involved with and make him stand out on his own. To that end, I found
[Guest]: that the 18 hours of interviews that Hodgson did with him in 1965, they were a goldmine.
[Guest]: They've never been looked at in any narrative of the transfer of power. And to me, this
[Guest]: was, it was almost criminal because you had his voice. It was him narrating how he had
[Guest]: actually worked through from 1918 onwards to 1951. And it brought his story into really
[Guest]: vivid life for me, which is why I've allowed his voice to do most of the talking in the
[Guest]: biography because for me, there was no other person who could tell it better. It was also
[Guest]: a challenge to me to try and understand how he might have felt given the fact that he
[Guest]: had just started out in government service when the independence movement was gaining
[Guest]: steam and what he must have felt as somebody who's sitting within the walls of the Imperial
[Guest]: Secretariat while his countrymen are clamoring to be free of colonial rule. Was there a moral
[Guest]: dilemma? Did he ever feel any kind of conflict? And in those tapes, there is my answer because
[Guest]: it turns out he did feel that kind of conflict. He genuinely was somebody who believed that,
[Guest]: look, I feel like I can work better against the system if I'm within the system. If I
[Guest]: can do, if I can bring about any kind of constitutional progress, that can be my contribution to this
[Guest]: country's fight for independence. I don't necessarily have to be out there in public
[Guest]: meetings in a protest, which other people are doing already. This is one way in which
[Guest]: I can contribute. And it also sidetracked me into wondering whether this was just VP
[Guest]: who thought like this or were there other people who thought like this? And it turns
[Guest]: out that there were. H. V. R. Iyengar, for instance, in his oral histories, which he's
[Guest]: left behind at Teen Moorthy, tells this lovely story of how, you know, a lot of people in
[Guest]: the civil service, including Iyengar, was so conflicted about how to deal with this
[Guest]: conundrum that they went to Sardar Patel and they said, look, are we doing something wrong
[Guest]: here? Shouldn't we be also rebelling like our countrymen are? And the Sardar thought
[Guest]: about this for a minute and then he said, no, you know, I mean, when India finally does
[Guest]: become independent, we're going to need people who are trained. We're going to need people
[Guest]: who've been there, done that and have experience in administration, in the do's and don'ts
[Guest]: of governance. So there should be no conundrum. You're doing what is right and will eventually
[Guest]: be right for this country because you will be inducted into an independent India civil
[Guest]: service. So actually speaking, it wasn't just VP who felt this way. It was there were other
[Guest]: people who felt that way as well. In the course, nearly four decades in government, VP was
[Guest]: exposed to egos that were huge, personalities that were huge. Often they were too huge to
[Guest]: be contained around the same table. And for him, as he's telling the story, it is essentially
[Guest]: a sort of clash of different personalities and egos at play that is actually going towards
[Guest]: making history what it is. You know, you had immensely petty arguments. You had immensely
[Guest]: vicious arguments also sometimes because these were high pressure situations, particularly
[Guest]: as the country moved into the 1940s. Tempers were high, you know, egos were huge. Vanity
[Guest]: was perennially getting wounded. And this man had to navigate so many different kinds
[Guest]: of personalities. And this was not just during the transfer of power, but in post transfer
[Guest]: of power during integration as well. For me, this was a fascinating sort of tapestry because
[Guest]: you had VP actually talking his way around different personalities. For instance, with
[Guest]: Mountbatten, he had to present his own plan to make it seem like it was Mountbatten's
[Guest]: idea because he knew that Mountbatten liked to take the credit and like to be center stage.
[Guest]: So he developed a knack for sort of adapting his ideas to those who are in power so that
[Guest]: it would seem like their idea, which is, I think, a major reason why his own contribution
[Guest]: has been so downplayed, why it's easy to efface VP Menon from the face of modern Indian history.
[Guest]: Because of this particular knack, because he found it best often to let others take
[Guest]: credit for ideas that potentially were game changers. And that to me was another challenge
[Guest]: while I was writing this book, because while in his official narratives, he's allowed people
[Guest]: to take the credit, in his oral history, he's very clear about certain things. And in other
[Guest]: people's oral histories as well, Alan Campbell Johnson, Mountbatten himself, H.V.R. Iyengar,
[Guest]: everyone is equally clear that VP Menon did most of the work. There was no one in power
[Guest]: at that point who did not command as much influence as VP. In fact, even when the Partition
[Guest]: Council was set up, Iyengar remembers that every decision was run by, he would sign off
[Guest]: on it even though he wasn't necessarily involved in every single committee that was operating
[Guest]: under the council. For me, that's been a fascinating eye-opener and a great insight into how the
[Guest]: wheels of power were actually turning at that point. There was a lot happening. It was not
[Guest]: necessarily as black and white as we see it today because everything was happening so
[Guest]: fast and there were events of momentous scale happening almost simultaneously. So to actually
[Guest]: be in boats at once and navigate such different personalities at the same time required some
[Amit Varma]: doing.
[Amit Varma]: And he was a doer. Let's kind of get back to biography. And you know, his childhood
[Amit Varma]: was infinitely fascinating to me because you know, he's growing up in the village and he's
[Amit Varma]: a headmaster's son and he's, you know, sent to school and all of that. And at some point
[Amit Varma]: this Tamilian headmaster at a future school basically kicks him out. And then you quote
[Amit Varma]: his own words, like he's very upset. He goes to the banks of the river, presumably cries
[Amit Varma]: a bit, kicks the trees. And then he says, quote, I found an empty liquor bottle on the
[Amit Varma]: banks of the river. It gave me an idea. I didn't bother to think about it or even about
[Amit Varma]: the consequences. I just wanted that Tamilian to pay for what he had done. I went to the
[Amit Varma]: shop and I told Ahmed, who was the shopkeeper, and I told Ahmed, I wanted some kerosene oil
[Amit Varma]: in a matchbox. My mother would send the money later, stop quote. And then he goes and burns
[Guest]: down his school.
[Guest]: Actually, this was a completely sensational reading. I mean, today, the few people who
[Guest]: actually remember V.P. Menon remember the story of a boy who burned down the school.
[Guest]: This was the Autopalem High School, which was basically the common point for most children
[Guest]: to come and study. He actually did set it on fire when I actually asked around. Descendants
[Guest]: of people who had actually gone to Autopalem High School attested to the fact that V.P.
[Guest]: had actually set the school on fire. It didn't completely burn down. It burned down halfway.
[Guest]: But yeah, he did set it on fire.
[Guest]: And he's 13 years old.
[Guest]: And he's 13 years old. I mean, there are lots of us who have been 13 and have wanted to
[Guest]: burn our schools down too. This boy actually did it. And what was even more interesting
[Guest]: to me was that he was so overcome with shame because he'd just been carried away by this
[Guest]: rage. And he was then so overcome with horror at what he'd done that he actually ran away
[Amit Varma]: from home.
[Amit Varma]: The same night.
[Guest]: The same night. And he actually hitches a ride on a train and it carries him to Kolar.
[Guest]: And he begins a life there, which is completely alien to the life that he's lived in before.
[Guest]: He's been this really pampered little boy. His mother adored him. He adored his mother.
[Guest]: He never really did a hard day's work in his life. And here he is suddenly lobbing up in
[Guest]: a gold mine to take up the life of a coolie boy. And he never done any such kind of work
[Guest]: in his life before. So, I mean, he suddenly basically changed his life overnight by this
[Guest]: one hot-headed act. And his life would never be the same again. He would not go back home
[Guest]: until it was time for him to get married. He wanted to actually make something of himself
[Guest]: because by this point he's thinking, I've basically set my school on fire. I brought
[Guest]: shame to my family. What will my mother think of me? I have to now make something of myself
[Guest]: to make up for whatever I've done.
[Guest]: And he goes to Kolar and he spends five years of his life, five of the most formative years
[Guest]: of any child's life, working in a gold mine, first as a coolie. And then he applies with
[Guest]: what I thought was great brazenness for the job of an overseer. And to me, that spoke
[Guest]: right there of somebody who had almost blind ambition and actually really didn't care what
[Guest]: anyone might think. Because, I mean, this is a boy who's not completed his formal schooling,
[Guest]: right? He's not got an examination certificate, but he has the audacity to go to a supervisor
[Guest]: and basically say, look, I want to apply for this post. And the supervisor gives him the
[Guest]: post. And it's something that actually marks his career, that will mark his career and
[Guest]: his personality as the years go by, because he's then now prone to doing this. He will
[Guest]: do it again in 1914 when he applies to the registrar of the Home Department and basically
[Guest]: says, look, give me a job in the Directorate of Statistics, you know, which is a new department
[Guest]: that's been set up by the Raj to essentially collect really boring statistical information
[Guest]: about things like crop output and demographics and rainfall. And he has worked his way northwards
[Guest]: from Kolar by this point. It is five years later.
[Amit Varma]: We are getting ahead of ourselves. Can I interrupt you and kind of go back? What I found, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you should say sorry for getting in the way of your narrative. No, what I found
[Amit Varma]: interesting even, you know, back at Ottapalam, there's a couple of things. One, you point
[Amit Varma]: out very evocatively the time that he would be waiting for his train at Ottapalam railway
[Amit Varma]: station. And all the people would look after him. He's 12 and 13 now and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: they're giving him little things to eat and drink. And then one day, one of them gives
[Amit Varma]: him the Madras Mail, the newspaper. And from that day, every single day, he's reading every
[Amit Varma]: single page. He's just sitting there and he's devouring. And he's a kid. He's 12 years old.
[Amit Varma]: He's 13 years old at the time he burns the school down. And this kind of struck me, this
[Amit Varma]: hunger to know everything about the world. Of course, if one of them gave him a smartphone
[Amit Varma]: with PUBG on it, we don't know what would have happened. But no, he's got this hunger
[Amit Varma]: for knowledge. The other thing that struck me is on how you point out, and then you quote
[Amit Varma]: him on this, that as the train, he gets on the train when he's running away from home.
[Amit Varma]: And then you quote him saying, quote, that train and forgive my pronunciations, my Mallu
[Amit Varma]: friends. I am in spirit one of you, but my pronunciations are not so great. This is VP
[Amit Varma]: Menon saying, quote, that train went from Ottapallam to Lakhiri and then Parli and then
[Amit Varma]: on to Olavakode. We went through a tunnel at Valayar and then we stopped at Pothanur.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, he's remembering this in the 1960s. This is part of his oral, the history
[Amit Varma]: that he recorded then. So, you know, almost 50 years later, more than 50 years later,
[Guest]: he remembers all the stops.
[Guest]: What I find that Nohans actually pointed this out is that he had an eidetic memory and that
[Guest]: is something that would serve him immensely.
[Amit Varma]: That's like a photographic memory.
[Guest]: Yeah, photographic memory. So basically he never forgot anything. And it's something
[Guest]: that came in incredibly importantly in his career. It would come in recollecting memory.
[Guest]: And as you said, he was always characterized by this really strong hunger to learn. It
[Guest]: makes you actually wistful thinking of a small boy on a railway platform in the middle of
[Guest]: nowhere, actually going through paper after paper, reading about events that he really
[Guest]: has no idea what is going on, you know, and he's reading about things like the partition
[Guest]: in Bengal and he's reading about, you know, political debates about international events.
[Guest]: And he has no clue who these people are or why it's happening at all, because life in
[Guest]: rural Kerala is worlds away from whatever might be happening.
[Guest]: But it doesn't stop him from thinking about these things, from having questions in his
[Guest]: head that obviously no one can answer for him at that point. But to me, sitting a little
[Guest]: boy sitting on a platform with, you know, a cup of chai or coffee and vada and idli
[Guest]: and reading the papers and reading about these men who signed pieces of papers to change
[Guest]: history and reconnecting the dots years later when he's actually one of those men signing
[Guest]: papers and making history. It was as if life had come full circle. But he was always characterized
[Guest]: by a strong desire to learn. It was something that he utilized as he grew up. And I saw
[Guest]: it more and more as he entered government service. He had this knack for taking wadges
[Guest]: of knowledge and adapting it to a particular situation, depending on what position in government
[Guest]: service he was, and also depending on the kind of person he was dealing with. So that
[Guest]: is something that he developed very early on because he had such a head for figures,
[Guest]: facts, for remembering entire pages of information. I remember my mother once telling me that
[Guest]: he could read one paragraph in the heaviest constitutional prose and you could ask him
[Guest]: that same paragraph a week later and he would recite it word for word. And it's something
[Guest]: that I really enjoyed because it's a characteristic that sounds cliched when you actually talk
[Guest]: about it, but it was something that was so reflected in how he actually worked his way
[Guest]: up and how he utilized that knowledge that I found myself believing it. This was somebody
[Guest]: who liked to learn. This was somebody for whom information was, it was pleasure. He
[Guest]: liked learning and he liked figures, facts. He wanted to know what made the heart of something
[Guest]: tick. He wanted to read around it. He wanted to read about it. It was something that never
[Guest]: left him right until the day he died. So yeah, that was very fascinating for me.
[Amit Varma]: And yet he wasn't a bookish kid. He was a man of action or at that point, a kid of action
[Unknown]: like you point out, he burns his school, which is not, by the way, something we recommend
[Amit Varma]: to 13 year old listeners of this show. You know, there are, I mean, yeah, that survivorship
[Amit Varma]: bias, he got away with it, but you know, you won't, don't try it at home. And what I'm
[Amit Varma]: also struck by is the same night he decides to leave, but he doesn't just leave. He figures
[Amit Varma]: out where he's going to go. In his own words, I had heard of the gold fields in Kolar. I
[Amit Varma]: knew I needed money to eat. That was the only thought in my head, how to fill my stomach.
[Amit Varma]: So there's this pampered entitled kid who runs away. And now you've given some perspective
[Amit Varma]: on what Kolar is in your book, which I think for the listeners is actually pretty useful.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote that bit again. How does it feel listening to your words in my voice?
[Amit Varma]: Very strange. Anyway, I'll read this bit out again, because I think it's important perspective
[Amit Varma]: when you just to imagine a 13 year old kid in this place, quote, the legend of Kolar's
[Amit Varma]: might was not to be trifled with. In 1897, a deadly rockfall and landslide inside the
[Amit Varma]: Mysore mine had killed upwards of 50 workers, injuring hundreds more. In January 1906, the
[Amit Varma]: wicker roof of one of the mining cages caught fire killing six workers and injuring 10 others.
[Amit Varma]: Sickness was a constant specter. Cholera, dysentery, malaria, asthma, and lung cancer
[Amit Varma]: raged through the coolie settlements, picking off those who survived the horrors of the
[Amit Varma]: underground. When dusk fell, workers would stumble out of their minds and their workstations
[Amit Varma]: and many would turn their faces towards the local liquor shops or gambling dens. Even
[Amit Varma]: the wives and children waited for them at home. The sky was perennially contaminated
[Amit Varma]: by smoke billowing from the tall brick chimneys that dotted the fields. The horizon was marred
[Amit Varma]: by a huge contraption with rotating wheels on top. He would later learn that this was
[Amit Varma]: a great lift that conveyed men from the surface of the earth to his bowels. The mines rumbled
[Amit Varma]: all day long with the occasional explosion, dynamite blasting through rock, shaking the
[Amit Varma]: earth and showering the debris and dust on workers in the adjacent narrow passes. Temperatures
[Amit Varma]: raged up to 157 degrees Fahrenheit. And the temperature is of course inside the mines.
[Amit Varma]: And what also struck me, what you pointed out is that the Englishmen that he dealt with
[Amit Varma]: at this point in time did not care that he did not have a school leaving certificate
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. They were willing to evaluate him on his own merits. And this is exactly
[Amit Varma]: a trope that continues for the rest of his life, where he rises to the top of the civil
[Amit Varma]: service without giving the ICS examination. And at every step, it is, you know, even when
[Amit Varma]: he's sort of treated badly, like when Mountbatten first comes to India, he's a reforms commissioner,
[Amit Varma]: but Mountbatten's got his own team and he wants nothing to do with him. But then at
[Amit Varma]: some point, he doesn't have a choice because VP is simply the best brain out there. And
[Amit Varma]: he kind of has to work with it. So, you know, so kind of Kolar happens and you point out
[Amit Varma]: about how Kolar taught him to be thrifty because he was earning so little and he wanted to
[Amit Varma]: send money home. And how it taught him to compartmentalize his emotions into separate
[Amit Varma]: watertight boxes, which you say will be, became a blessing and a curse in later years. So
[Amit Varma]: when you say it became a blessing and a curse in later years, I'm presuming you mean it
[Guest]: became a blessing in the workspace. Yes, it was not a curse at home. Absolutely. It was
[Amit Varma]: anything but a blessing at home. So from here, from Kolar, he then, this young teenager then
[Guest]: lands up in Bombay. Yeah. Tell me about this. For one, I agree when you say he encountered
[Guest]: really supportive English supervisors through the rest of his career and his life. And which
[Guest]: is why I found Kolar completely fascinating. Because like I said, they're transformative
[Guest]: years for any child's life. For VP, they've changed him completely in ways that I think
[Guest]: he didn't even expect. And when we're talking about a pampered, privileged kid running off
[Guest]: to Kolar, I think it also speaks a lot about a kid who was incredibly practical and had
[Guest]: a lot of pride as well. He knew that he needed food to eat, but he also knew that he was
[Guest]: not going to go home, face his parents and, you know, admit to what he'd done. He'd much
[Guest]: rather go off, try to do something that makes something of himself and send money back home.
[Guest]: It's incredibly self-sufficient. It is a survival tactic. It also speaks of a lot, like I said,
[Guest]: a lot of practicality and pride. He is blessed completely when he meets supervisors who don't
[Guest]: want a matriculation examination certificate. It is the first time that he actually encounters
[Guest]: someone who says, it doesn't matter what your credentials are at a piece of paper, don't
[Guest]: matter. And that's something that he's going to carry with him for the rest of his life.
[Guest]: And we can talk about that later, of course, but, you know, when he gets sacked from Kolar,
[Guest]: he basically starts working his way northwards. And the information here is incredibly sketchy.
[Guest]: There is a point when he's first gone to Bangalore, where he works as a clerk in the Imperial
[Guest]: Tobacco Company. From there, he goes to Indore and these are events that have been pieced
[Guest]: together from what he told various other people. So there is a lot of oral history here, but
[Guest]: also recollections of what others remembered of VP's childhood as well. So he also went
[Guest]: to Indore to try and teach the kid of a landed gentleman English. He then ends up in Bombay
[Guest]: and he is selling hand towels outside Victoria Terminus. And again, not a life that he's
[Guest]: used to. He's done several menial things along the way by now. Selling towels doesn't seem
[Guest]: to be anything different. And he's essentially going through a period of great emotional
[Guest]: turmoil, understandably so. He goes to sleep one day and he wakes up to find that his gold
[Guest]: eardrop has been stolen. And he's almost in tears because he's now been away from home
[Guest]: for so long. And he's now been on his own for so long and fending for himself for so
[Guest]: long that on one hand, it's become almost part of his character. On the other hand,
[Guest]: he's still a boy who misses home and misses his mother. And he doesn't know what he's
[Guest]: doing here. And these to me are moments where the boy is becoming a man, but very reluctantly
[Guest]: so. They are experiences that are teaching him extremely hard things. I don't think any...
[Amit Varma]: He's been cruelly pushed into manhood rather than I guess becoming a man.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's not a simple transition for him, you know, because and it's, let me say right
[Guest]: now that this was a choice he made when he chose to run away from home. Indeed, when
[Guest]: he chose to set his school on fire, it was a choice that he made.
[Amit Varma]: This was a choice made for him by whoever left that empty liquor bottle on the, you
[Amit Varma]: know, seashore. Had he just carried the bottle away, the idea might not have stopped V.P.
[Guest]: Menon. Who knows?
[Guest]: So, I mean, you know, he's essentially, the transition from boyhood to manhood has not
[Guest]: been simple so far. He's had to, he's been kicked out of several jobs. He has basically,
[Guest]: he feels like he's let down his family in more ways than one. By this point, his father's
[Guest]: also died. His mother is not doing so well either. And he thinks, and he's plagued by
[Guest]: the thought that he might just end up being a nobody from nowhere. And again, fate steps
[Guest]: in and he is given, he's chanced upon by this gentleman who, English gentleman who works
[Guest]: in the Government of India in the Home Department. Now, who this person is, we don't know. We
[Guest]: merely know that he was given a letter of recommendation, which he was instructed to
[Guest]: carry to Delhi. And he was basically told that, look, you go to the Government of India
[Guest]: and you basically use this letter to apply for a job. And he does that because by this
[Guest]: point, he doesn't know what else to do. So he goes off there. At this point, he doesn't
[Guest]: even know that he has to sit for the ICS examinations. I think that's a thought that never crossed
[Guest]: his head until he was very well within the walls of the secretariat. And then he only
[Guest]: realized when he first arrived in Delhi, clutching a letter, he was just a boy looking for a
[Guest]: job. That was it. He was thinking of nothing like academic credentials or professional
[Guest]: qualifications. He was just looking for a way to survive. And this part of the story
[Guest]: is another part that's gone down in the legend that surrounds V.P. Menon, right? Because
[Guest]: we've heard of how he reaches Delhi and his pocket is picked. And he basically reaches
[Guest]: Delhi in the spring of 1914. And he's 21 years old by this point. And he arrives to find
[Guest]: that the government has essentially packed its bags and gone off to Simla as it does
[Guest]: every year. But he wasn't to know that. So he was just basically told, please go back,
[Guest]: catch another train and go to Simla. And he arrives at the station and finds his wallet
[Guest]: has been stolen. Now in legend, it's gone down that it was a kindly Sardarji who gave
[Guest]: him the money. Actually, what happened was that it was a fellow Mallu who gave him the
[Guest]: money. And this fellow Mallu will play a huge role in his life later on, though he's not
[Guest]: to know that now. But he's given the money to go off to Simla. He arrives in Simla, goes
[Guest]: to Gautam Castle, presents the letter and is told, boss, we don't have any openings.
[Guest]: And he's dumbstruck because he was under the rather naive impression that if this gentleman
[Guest]: had given him a letter of recommendation, there must be a job. How can there not be
[Guest]: a job? And he persists and he says, there must be something you can do. And these guys
[Guest]: say, okay, fine. There's this clerk who's gone off on vacation. He's gone for two months.
[Guest]: You're free to join for two months, but that's all we can give you. It's a temporary
[Guest]: job. If you want it, you can have it. And he takes it. And it's again, it's a life
[Guest]: changing moment for him because it's also a moment that speaks to me of a lot of desperation
[Guest]: because there is zero way that he can go back now with nothing. And he's heard about
[Guest]: government service. He doesn't know what it entails, but he's heard that once you
[Guest]: get into government service, it can give you a good life and a stable life, which is what
[Guest]: he's looking for. And at this point, he is just driven by questions of survival. How
[Guest]: do you survive? How do you make money? How do you keep your stomach full? And he says,
[Guest]: okay, fine. I'll take the job. And in those two months, he's also hunting for more permanent
[Guest]: forms of employment. Nothing is coming along. And the directorate of statistics, which I
[Guest]: referred to earlier, that set up. And he thinks, what the hell? I will just put in a word.
[Guest]: I will apply directly to the registrar and see what he can do. And again, it's the same
[Guest]: sort of brazen devil-may-care attitude that supported him earlier. This is somebody who
[Guest]: never seemed to care that he had anything to lose. He always went at life like that.
[Amit Varma]: He had nothing to lose. As Dylan once wrote, if you ain't got nothing, you got nothing
[Guest]: to lose. Absolutely. Which at every stage of his life, he ain't got nothing. So he was
[Guest]: just going for it. And it's something that I really admired at the outset. You've got
[Guest]: nothing. You've got no academic credentials. You're a temporary typist. And yet you have
[Guest]: the audacity to write a letter and say, look, there's a directorate that's opening up. It's
[Guest]: going to need manpower. Here I am. What do you say? And this file actually still exists
[Guest]: in the National Archives. It's this really ancient, brittle file, but it has VP's first
[Guest]: letter in 1914. And it has the registrar's reply as well, saying that we've considered
[Guest]: your application and you're good to go. And he's packing his bags to go from Simla to
[Guest]: Delhi when the First World War breaks out. Yet again, a game-changing moment for VP.
[Guest]: Because once the war breaks out, officials are going back home. They're going to enlist
[Guest]: in the war. More spaces are opening up. So he's got a good chance of making this work
[Guest]: for the first time. He's still not a confirmed employee of the Government of India. And this
[Guest]: is something that's going to be true of his career for the next four years. He will not
[Guest]: be a confirmed employee. He will be bobbing from department to department. He worked in
[Guest]: the Directorate of Statistics for a while. He would then go on to work as a clerk in
[Guest]: Lady Harding's Medical College Committee. He would do really temporary stuff, which
[Guest]: sort of stopped gap employments, you know, one month, two months, six months. And this
[Guest]: was to continue until Edwin Montague became Secretary of State for India. And when Montague
[Guest]: goes ahead and makes his famous August 20th declaration, which is essentially speaking
[Guest]: to the fact that one day, and that day is not specified right now, but one day, India
[Guest]: will have the right to self-governing institutions. And Montague himself is somebody who's creating
[Guest]: a lot of waves for very different reasons in Whitehall, because Montague is very mercurial,
[Guest]: very temperamental, also loves the limelight, as a certain Viceroy will decades later. But
[Guest]: Montague is also rather radical in his outlook as far as the colony is concerned. He's somebody
[Guest]: who feels that, look, if you're giving Indians a westernized form of education, if you're
[Guest]: teaching them to think like us, they will think like us. Why will they not want independence
[Guest]: at some point? And VPs heard Montague's speech on the radio, and he's completely startled
[Guest]: by this. He's never heard this kind of speech before. And in his later years, when he's
[Guest]: actually talking to Harry Hodgson about this, he says, Montague was somebody I thought was
[Guest]: a real visionary. And if he had been allowed to stay, he could have done wonderful things
[Guest]: at that point. We all know history didn't go quite that way. But anyway, Edwin Montague
[Guest]: is coming out to India in the winter of 1917. And this is when the first sort of germs of
[Guest]: the reforms branch are put together. So Montague essentially will need a roving sort of branch
[Guest]: to accompany him across the country as he's undertaking a tour. He's going to various
[Guest]: provinces, he's going to princely states to basically meet political leaders, princes,
[Guest]: etc., get their opinions about the ideas that he's got for India. Accompanying him will
[Guest]: be a small team, typists, stenographers, clerks, and it will be headed by somebody called William
[Guest]: Maris. Now, this wasn't called the reforms branch at this point, it was called the emergency
[Guest]: branch. But essentially, it was what would become the reforms branch later. William Maris
[Guest]: was technically India's first reforms commissioner, though that post hadn't been invented yet.
[Guest]: Maris and Montague would not get on. But it was a moment that changed VP's career because
[Guest]: he has now gone from a miniscule salary to 120 rupees a month, plus 2 rupees for traveling
[Guest]: allowance. He is now for the first time exposed to what goes on behind making laws that can
[Guest]: potentially change history. And it's nothing as soul-stirring as he probably thought it
[Guest]: was. It was essentially a lot of bickering and squabbling over redrafting sentences,
[Guest]: over changing the position of a clause. Should clause A be clause C instead? Does that give
[Guest]: this act more weight? It's stuff that can be mind-numbingly boring. And yet, because
[Guest]: it was being played out in front of him, he would eventually become Maris' go-to person,
[Guest]: in the sense that he was primary typist that Maris would essentially have in the room to
[Guest]: basically take notes, redraft certain pages and phrases. So he was present when Maris
[Guest]: and Montague began squabbling, began arguing. And again, this is not something that's found
[Guest]: its way into his own official narrative of this. This is something that lived in his
[Guest]: memory. And he spoke about this to Hudson years later after he'd quit government service.
[Guest]: And the fights between Maris and Montague actually come alive when VP talks about this.
[Guest]: You know, he's basically talking about two different people with two very different
[Guest]: perspectives on how this should go for India. Maris didn't agree with a lot of what Montague
[Guest]: was saying. Maris had to shut up about it for so long that eventually it began to affect
[Guest]: the working of the entire team because Maris would take to sulking and Montague would take
[Guest]: to being incredibly irritated and frustrated. And eventually, you know, dams of frustration
[Guest]: burst and there would be screaming matches. Montague would be thumping the table and telling
[Guest]: Maris that he had been basically hired to do this particular job. And if he didn't want to do it,
[Guest]: he could get out. And to all of this, VP was privy, right? So he's sitting there. He's now
[Guest]: seeing actually what happens behind the scenes for the first time. He's exposed to high pressure
[Guest]: situations, to huge egos, to how badly tempers can fray under pressure. He's also exposed to
[Guest]: the real boring aspect of reform. Not all reform is revolutionary. This is the kind of reform that
[Guest]: takes years to put together almost. That takes weeks of sleepless nights where you sit up and
[Guest]: you basically read the same thing over and over again until it reads better. And that, I think,
[Guest]: impacted his career hugely because most of his career was built on knowledge that he gained
[Guest]: firsthand. This wasn't knowledge that you could gain from a book. This wasn't knowledge that you
[Guest]: could gain from sitting for any kind of exam. This was knowledge that you got only by being
[Guest]: in the same room as the people making the laws, as people making history. And it involved a lot
[Guest]: of stuff that he had expected. He would always remember those moments as being very crucial to
[Guest]: how he actually went about the business of making laws and making amendments to various laws because
[Guest]: he watched Maris being unable to navigate as far as Montague was concerned. And he realized that,
[Guest]: you know what, sometimes you have to navigate through different personalities. You have to
[Guest]: be able to sort of slip and slide your way through until you get your point heard. It need not always
[Guest]: involve a shouting match. It can, of course, sometimes under high pressure situations.
[Guest]: But he basically learned his art of diplomacy. And I don't say this lightly. I think he was the
[Guest]: greatest internal diplomat that we've had as well, because he was navigating two different parties at
[Guest]: one point in his life. He was navigating three different political interests and formulating
[Guest]: two different countries at the end of his career, not to mention dealing with independent states.
[Guest]: So he received his training 100% on the job. And I think that is something that makes his story
[Guest]: unique. It makes his own career and his own life stand apart, because this was knowledge that he
[Amit Varma]: couldn't have gained from a book. In fact, you know, it struck me while reading your book,
[Amit Varma]: and I had a sense of this even before reading your book, because everyone sort of knows V.P.
[Amit Varma]: Menon. And I'd read one of his books while prepping for one of my earlier episodes with
[Amit Varma]: Srinath Raghavan. And it struck me totally that he is probably our greatest civil servant. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I can't even see how you would make a shortlist at all. I mean, he's just clearly the obvious
[Amit Varma]: choice for all the remarkable things he did. And what's interesting in what your book brings out
[Amit Varma]: is that his biography prepared him for it, that everything that was happening in his life
[Amit Varma]: was almost like an academy for what would happen in the 1940s at that crucial moment our nation
[Amit Varma]: was born. For example, in 1914, you've quoted from a letter he's written to his brother where
[Amit Varma]: he's saying, God has been very kind to me. I have been given my fair share of second and third
[Amit Varma]: chances. I will make this one work, stop quote. And then the Department of Statistics was very
[Amit Varma]: sort of interesting to me. He didn't stay there long. But what you've written about it, and again,
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote your words, quote, the modern but dingy offices of the newly established directorate of
[Amit Varma]: statistics embodied the Raj's passion for statistics and recorded information, the size
[Amit Varma]: and diversity of India in its population, its geography and agricultural produce made its
[Amit Varma]: imperative for its quote unquote masters to keep painstaking records of changes in demography,
[Amit Varma]: crop production and prices, rainfall, industrial production, education, sanitation, mining and
[Amit Varma]: transport. The directorate had been established in April 1914. With this ambitious goal in mind,
[Amit Varma]: the compilation of this information was probably as crashingly boring as it sounds. But to VP,
[Amit Varma]: it was eye opening for the first time in his life. He was given a bird's eye view of the science of
[Amit Varma]: India, stop quote. And what you referred to earlier, that you know, people often think of
[Amit Varma]: the you know, if you're talking about the shaping of a nation, you think of grand speech, great
[Amit Varma]: ideas, these are the high principles. But here is someone who 33 years before India actually
[Amit Varma]: becomes independent. Yeah, he's actually learning the country through statistics, through data,
[Amit Varma]: through this mindless log of trying to figure it out, which sounds both to me fantastically boring
[Amit Varma]: and incredibly inspiring. So that's a good note to take a quick commercial break while we figure
[Amit Varma]: out which one it is. If you're listening to the scene in the unseen, it means you like listening
[Amit Varma]: to audio and you're thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you to check out
[Amit Varma]: Storytel, the sponsors of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range
[Amit Varma]: of audiobooks from around the world. The international collection is stellar, but so is
[Amit Varma]: a local collection. They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks. What's more,
[Amit Varma]: I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I talk about one book
[Amit Varma]: every week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on. Download that app and listen to my
[Amit Varma]: show. And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend
[Amit Varma]: an audiobook that I liked on that platform every week. My recommendation for this week is Where
[Amit Varma]: India Goes by Diane Coffey and Dean Spears. This book takes a closer look at how Indians go to the
[Amit Varma]: toilet and has some startling insights about open defecation. Coffey and Spears argue that the
[Amit Varma]: practice of open defecation is not just a result of poverty, but a direct consequence of the caste
[Amit Varma]: system. Listen to the book for more or check out episode 82 of the scene in the unseen, where I
[Amit Varma]: discuss just this with Shruti Rajgopalan. We spoke about this book as well. So do listen to it on
[Amit Varma]: Storytel, Where India Goes by Diane Coffey and Dean Spears. Download the Storytel app or visit
[Amit Varma]: Storytel.com. Remember, that's Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Narayani Basu about our greatest
[Amit Varma]: civil servant, VP Menon. If you don't agree with that judgment, kindly tell me who is our greatest
[Amit Varma]: civil servant then. And we've right now come up to the late 1910s. Montague was in town. VP is
[Amit Varma]: part of what will later become the reforms branch, but is now called something else. And like you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out as a learning experience from him again, quoting from your book, quote,
[Amit Varma]: watching the men, listening to the debates, typing the dictation, he learned how to think around the
[Amit Varma]: problem, how to work on contingency solutions, to always have a backup plan and how to factor
[Amit Varma]: in positives in order to neutralize a heavily negative situation. More importantly, as he
[Amit Varma]: watched different personalities clash or meld with each other, he began to understand the very real
[Amit Varma]: skill that was required to negotiate the choppy waters of the human ego. Stop quote. And what's
[Amit Varma]: also interesting here is that there is an event around this time that also affects him deeply.
[Guest]: And that's Jallianwala Bagh. Yeah. That's something that I actually found that he'd actually left
[Guest]: behind a letter as to that. And he writes, it is in fact, an event that actually kickstarts
[Guest]: the moral dilemma that I was referring to earlier. Jallianwala Bagh, when it happens,
[Guest]: and he reads about it in the papers, and he is really furious. These are people who, on the one
[Guest]: hand, have been very kind to him, have given him opportunities that he didn't dream were possible.
[Guest]: And yet these were the people who were also leading to mass scale massacres across the
[Guest]: country. And Amritsar really shook him. For the first time, question what he was doing
[Guest]: here within the walls of the very government that was carrying out this oppression and
[Guest]: carrying out this bloodbath. What was he doing here? And he goes through a period where he is
[Guest]: questioning this, but also what is dominating his mind at this point is that he still needs to get
[Guest]: a permanent place. He still needs a job. This is still a moment of great, it's actually a moment
[Guest]: of even greater conflict because on the one hand, you have his incredible need to survive,
[Guest]: trying to balance out with a question of what am I doing here? Why am I here? Shouldn't I be out
[Guest]: there with these people? These are my countrymen and they are getting slaughtered. What should I
[Guest]: do? And at this point, the reforms department forms in 1922, and that's three years later,
[Guest]: no doubt, but he's carrying this burden right through. It is only in 1922 that he actually
[Guest]: gets a letter confirming him. And he no longer has this sort of sword hanging over his head that
[Guest]: you are not a permanent employee, that you can be sacked at any time. That allows him actually some
[Guest]: breathing room to think about this properly. I actually found that in the mid-1920s, early to
[Guest]: mid-1920s, is actually when VP starts thinking about this far more introspectively. And he comes
[Guest]: to what I feel is a very cold-blooded decision because this was a time when the country was
[Guest]: actually being swept along on a tidal wave of emotion and nationalism. VP, on the other hand,
[Guest]: has taken this really cool decision, right? It's a very cool-brained decision because he's thinking,
[Guest]: that's great, they're out there protesting. What about how to make actual change happen? He had
[Guest]: no desire to actively join politics. He'd been given a letter of confirmation, which meant that
[Guest]: he was within the system. He may have been a clerk, but he was within the system. Did he think
[Guest]: he could move up from there? Was it possible? And this moment is the moment that sparked his
[Guest]: actual ambition to start moving upwards, to start climbing the ladder of government service.
[Guest]: Until then, it had primarily been driven by how to keep his pockets full and how to not make a
[Guest]: greater ass of himself than he already felt he had made. Now it was a more detached decision
[Guest]: that he took, that this was actually something he could work with. He'd been given a chance to
[Guest]: actually work, be in government service and try and change the system from within. And his ambition
[Guest]: to actually rise to the top started from now. This is actually the moment that sees VP Menon
[Guest]: beginning to work towards rising up in the path that he's chosen for himself. And it ties up
[Guest]: beautifully with whatever he's faced before, because he's by this time been exposed to
[Guest]: really nitty gritty stuff of administration. He's seen that a country doesn't really run
[Guest]: on soul-stirring speeches alone. It doesn't run with no vision at all. And even if you have a
[Guest]: vision, there are cogs behind that vision that are required for that vision to work. And he's
[Guest]: worked in enough mundane departments and done enough mundane duties by now to know that behind
[Guest]: revolution is administration. You need people who can administer, who can actually
[Guest]: take care of that aspect. And he feels, for me, it's lovely because he's actually been put through
[Guest]: his paces in ways that ICS officials proper would not necessarily have been through the same
[Guest]: position. He's actually started right from the bottom and he can now work his way to the top.
[Guest]: Advantage of starting right from the bottom. And this is something he would advocate years later.
[Guest]: He would always tell his sons that. In fact, he would tell my grandfather that. My grandfather
[Guest]: would go on to become director of ITC, but he always told my grandfather, look, you start from
[Guest]: the floor of the plant and work your way up so that when you are sitting at the top, you know
[Guest]: everything that's happening in the plant. You know how to roll a cigarette even, or the science
[Guest]: behind it as well. I think that's something that mattered hugely to VP. For him, it was not just
[Guest]: administration. It was what went on behind administration as well. Facts and figures may
[Guest]: sound boring to many of us. And to me as well, when I was doing the research for this particular
[Guest]: part of his life, it was insanely boring, but it was also immensely crucial. You cannot build a
[Guest]: country without knowing almost intimately how it functions. And the director of statistics in that
[Guest]: sense, I think gave him for the first time an almost aerial view of A, how vast this country is
[Guest]: and B, how many factors you have to take into consideration to actually pull it together as
[Guest]: one cohesive unit of governance. So yes, I think it ties in a lot with the point that you raised
[Guest]: earlier, like everything was an academy that put him through his paces. And you know, a couple of
[Amit Varma]: things strike me here. One, of course, is that if you're listening to this episode now, you might
[Amit Varma]: wonder a little bit about VP's dilemma at working with the British and at the same time feeling his
[Amit Varma]: sympathy for his people. But that's simply because we've normalized this notion of India as it is
[Amit Varma]: today. And we think back on the British as the enemy. But this was not the case. At that point
[Amit Varma]: in time, the British were administrating the country, there was no India. Ideas of India,
[Amit Varma]: if at all they existed, were diffused and up in the air. And VP is just trying to figure out,
[Amit Varma]: I would guess, within his, you know, the limitations of what he can do and cannot do,
[Amit Varma]: that how best can I make a contribution in this. And what's also interesting is that he's actually
[Amit Varma]: in the one department of the British Indian government, where he can make that difference.
[Guest]: He's in the reforms department. This is going to be, this is the place, this is the center.
[Guest]: Yeah. And he's actually drafted in there only because of his experience with Madison Montague,
[Guest]: right? Because he was a member of the core team that actually accompanied Montague,
[Guest]: he was deemed as somebody who had sufficient experience to carry on into the formalized
[Guest]: branch of the reforms department. And he would never actually leave the reforms department,
[Guest]: that would be where he stayed throughout his career in government.
[Guest]: Till India became independent.
[Guest]: And it, I think, as you say, it was really fitting that he would end up in the one
[Guest]: branch that was set up to actually implement reform. It had a very shaky beginning because
[Guest]: it would shut down and reopen a couple of times before it reopened for good in the 1930s. And,
[Guest]: you know, in between then he was drafted to the services of Malcolm Haley and, you know,
[Guest]: he was working with people independently outside the reforms branch when it closed.
[Guest]: So, it had a very shaky sort of start, but it was the actual branch that would go on to
[Guest]: implement reform that would see to constitutional progress. So, he was actually very fortunately
[Guest]: in a position to actually make his ambition succeed. And I think that's incredibly unique.
[Guest]: And it's also serendipitous, as I said, very few people actually got to do that.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's serendipitous for India also, because, you know, you get the nuts and bolts
[Amit Varma]: of what is really happening between 47 and 51 as the union kind of comes together. And it almost
[Amit Varma]: strikes you that you needed one guy to be there. You know, if he didn't exist, you would have to
[Amit Varma]: invent him and you cannot invent people whole scale. So, you know, it's kind of, it's not
[Amit Varma]: necessary that we would have come together the way we did.
[Guest]: You know, I feel like when we look at the history of our transfer of power, what we forget very
[Guest]: easily is that much of the sweeping changes that were brought about politically, legally,
[Guest]: constitutionally, were just done by a handful of men. I mean, the independence, Indian independence
[Guest]: bill, for instance, was actually essentially the work for men who had to basically deconstruct
[Guest]: three and a half centuries of British rule in a matter of weeks.
[Guest]: And VP, of course, leading that.
[Guest]: And VP is leading that. So, you know, I mean, it's very easy to sort of overlook that,
[Guest]: and it's easy to let civil servants as an entire class sort of slide under the radar.
[Guest]: And it, to me, that's something that needs to be focused on more. It's one of the reasons
[Guest]: why I wrote this story, because you don't think of a revolution in terms of nuts and bolts.
[Guest]: You don't think of a transfer of power in terms of nuts and bolts. And as you said,
[Guest]: the formation of the Union of India, the integration of the country itself,
[Guest]: was something that was at that point carried out almost single-handedly by VP Menon.
[Guest]: He worked himself almost to death during that point, because he was crisscrossing the country,
[Guest]: going to 565 princely states. So, even in the 1920s, going into the 1930s, it was still really
[Guest]: an arduous process because you had all these different ideas of where India was supposed
[Guest]: to be going. You know, one idea was being discarded, another was being picked up in
[Guest]: accordance with shifting times and shifting political moods. And it was still very difficult
[Guest]: to try and pin down what India looked like at that point. In the late 20s and 30s, there were still
[Guest]: ideas of a federal India being tossed about. What would a federal India mean? You know,
[Guest]: what was the position of the princely states within the federal India? There were questions
[Guest]: that nobody had really thought of and were now being almost deconstructed forensically as such.
[Guest]: And VP was at the sidelines at this point. He was still a clerk at this point. And yet,
[Guest]: it was a curious juxtaposition because even while he was at the sidelines,
[Guest]: he was also at the frontline of political reform. So, it was a very curious position to be in
[Guest]: because he is somebody who is essentially meant to be taking notes, etc. at this point. And yet,
[Guest]: in 1930, he is told by Hawthorne Lewis, who is his supervisor in the reforms department,
[Guest]: look, come with me to London for the first roundtable conference. And again, he's gone
[Guest]: as a member of a secretariat. He's essentially sitting there at the sidelines, but he's actually
[Guest]: seeing leading figures of the Indian independence movement. He's seeing Gandhi getting out from his
[Guest]: car. He's making friends with the Raja of Sarila. In fact, you've pointed out how Hawthorne Lewis
[Amit Varma]: told him at this point in time, quote, open your mouth when you have an idea, VP. Otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: you'll be lost in the crowd. Yeah, stop quote. So, you know, again, another British supervisor
[Amit Varma]: taking him under his wing and giving him the courage to actually speak out and what was kind
[Amit Varma]: of interesting and how you point out about how this journey changed him forever was that there's
[Amit Varma]: this 1930 roundtable conference in London and he's going on the ship called the SS Multan.
[Amit Varma]: And everybody's there. Gandhi's there, Jinnah's there, the whole gang is there. And in fact,
[Guest]: Jinnah becomes a close pal of his. That actually was, it's sort of heartwarming
[Guest]: because you know, when we read about Jinnah today, we know the Jinnah that we associate
[Guest]: with in the 40s and the formation of Pakistan. And Jinnah was never someone you can understand
[Guest]: even today. I think even his more dedicated biographers were never really able to pin down
[Guest]: Jinnah and who Jinnah was. But in 1925 is when VP actually meets Jinnah for the first time.
[Guest]: And this is with the Muddiman committee, which has basically been set up to sort of investigate the
[Guest]: workings of the Government of India Act 1919. And VP is again in the background. He is the person
[Guest]: who's basically filing the papers and putting them back into their boxes and very mundane stuff like
[Guest]: that. And this is a room that's filled with the political bigwigs at that time, Tej Bahadur
[Guest]: Sapru, people of his ilk. And Jinnah sort of strolls up to VP and says, have you had lunch yet?
[Guest]: And VP is considerably taken aback. And he says, no, I was going to get something from the mess.
[Guest]: And Jinnah says, why would you do that? Let's have lunch. And so they went off to lunch. They
[Guest]: went to Cecil Hotel. And he still remembered, after all those years, he still remembered the
[Guest]: kind of looks he got when he entered the hotel with Jinnah. And Jinnah was a rising star in
[Guest]: Indian politics at that point. You know, he was brilliant. He was not the twisted man that he
[Guest]: became later, but he was very avuncular at that point. This was a very approachable Jinnah. This
[Guest]: was some Jinnah who liked to take young men under his wing and sit and chat with them. And that's
[Guest]: what he does in 1925. As well as in 1930, VP encounters Jinnah on board the SS Multan and the
[Guest]: ship docks in Cairo on the way to London. And Jinnah takes VP basically on a tour of Cairo.
[Guest]: And he is basically sitting with Jinnah in the car discussing the history of Egypt, the politics of
[Guest]: not only Egypt, but also the world. He's taken by Jinnah to lunch at one of Cairo's finest hotels.
[Guest]: He can still remember that that was the first time he ate fresh dates. And it's life changing
[Guest]: for VP because at this point he didn't ever really consider that he would be in contact with
[Guest]: people that he just read about. These had once been names on pieces of paper to him and now
[Guest]: here they were in the flesh. And not all of them were bad. They were human and they weren't unkind
[Guest]: to him. He also remembered at one point when the reforms branch had shut down that he worked very
[Guest]: briefly with Malcolm Haley. And Malcolm Haley was also somebody that VP remembered very warmly in
[Guest]: throughout his life. So he had made friends by this point with people from both sides.
[Guest]: And he had encountered English supervisors who put a lot of merit into the kind of ideas you gave.
[Guest]: They put more merit onto your actual work rather than who you were or where you were from or where
[Guest]: you'd studied. He became good friends with most of his supervisors. In fact, with Hawthorne,
[Guest]: he was quite excellent friends. And Lewis actually recognized VP's talent, as I've said in my book.
[Guest]: And he encouraged it. He insisted that VP opens his mouth and speak when he had an idea. He was
[Guest]: never somebody who told VP to shut up. And so they go to London and London itself is eye-opening for
[Guest]: VP. He's now in the capital of the empire, essentially. He's seeing a different society.
[Guest]: He's seeing for the first time that it's okay if the driver of your car enters the same restaurant
[Guest]: and eats at the same restaurant as you are. He's hobnobbing with the leading lights of
[Amit Varma]: India's independence movement. Including all the princes he will
[Guest]: get to know more intimately. The Raja of Sarala became, in fact,
[Guest]: quite a good friend at this point. And the Raja of Sarala was a minor state in central India.
[Guest]: And Sarala was there representing some of the minor princes for the roundtable conference.
[Guest]: And he would become, he as well as his son Narendra, would become very good friends with VP
[Guest]: during the course of VP's government career. But the Raja was never somebody who was standoffish
[Guest]: or aloof. He was very charming. He was cultured. He was very debonair. But he treated VP as an
[Guest]: equal. And VP learned more than he ever dreamed that he would. First of all, it was a moment of
[Guest]: immense personal achievement. He's gone overseas for the first time. He's standing in the Savoy
[Guest]: Hotel. He's standing at what he feels is a milestone in his career and his life, both.
[Guest]: He doesn't know whether he'll even come back again. But here he is, and he's determined to
[Guest]: make the most of it. He's also exposed to different ideas at this point. So there was a very vocal
[Guest]: section of women in England at that point who were demanding equal rights for electoral franchise.
[Guest]: And he knows that in India as well, there have been women who have been demanding equal voting
[Guest]: rights. Sarojini Naidu, Mrinalini Sen, all of them felt that, look, if we are subjects of the empire,
[Guest]: we pay our taxes, why are we not being given the right to vote and have a say in the future
[Guest]: of our country? VP himself is from an extremely strong matrilineal background. He likes independent,
[Guest]: strong women. And he agrees with this. He feels, why should they not be given a chance?
[Guest]: But these are, for now, ideas that he will internalize. They will come to play
[Guest]: almost seven years later in 1937. But for now, it's just a moment of real discovery for him,
[Guest]: because he's finding out that nobody, however high a rank they hold, felt it was beneath them
[Guest]: to associate with a mere clerk. He was treated as an equal by prince and politician alike.
[Guest]: And it was an experience that, again, changed his perspective on what politics was and what
[Guest]: life was also. And that was a milestone in his career at that point.
[Amit Varma]: You know, speaking of your friendship with Jinnah, and of course, you go on to write
[Amit Varma]: how in the book, you know, VP would not recognize the Jinnah he would meet in the 40s.
[Amit Varma]: So change from this. But I was sort of reminded of an earlier anecdote,
[Amit Varma]: which you briefly mentioned in your book. I mean, firstly, you know, you referred to Jinnah in 25
[Amit Varma]: as a rising star. I would say he was more kind of an eclipse star already. He was a rising star,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps in the 1910s. And at one point, he was, you know, after Gokhale and Feroz Shah Mehta and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that those moderates from the party died, everyone expected Jinnah to sort of be
[Amit Varma]: the next face of the Congress Party. And Gandhi was a marginal figure at that time.
[Amit Varma]: And then Gandhi took over the Congress Party with his, you know, by getting together with
[Amit Varma]: the Ali brothers and the whole Khilafat movement. And that's a story in itself.
[Amit Varma]: But the anecdote that struck me was where you point out that in 1920, in the Congress session,
[Amit Varma]: at one point, Jinnah protests against what the Ali brothers and Gandhi are planning. And he says
[Amit Varma]: that that is not the constitutional way. And then Muhammad Ali stands up and he tells him the story
[Amit Varma]: of how a Tory was once at Piccadilly Square. And there was a preacher there who was talking about,
[Amit Varma]: who was trying to convert everyone there and saying, this is God's way, come to God's way.
[Amit Varma]: And the Tory went and asked the preacher that, tell me how long have you been following God's
[Amit Varma]: way? And the guy said, 20 years. And he said, in 20 years has got you as far as Piccadilly way?
[Amit Varma]: No, thank you. And it's a very telling story because it's also sort of telling Jinnah that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, the moderates have failed. You know, that the constitutional way of Navroji and Ranade and
[Amit Varma]: Gokhale and Mehta, and to some extent, Motilal Nehru also up to this point. And now Jinnah
[Amit Varma]: himself has failed and you need something more radical. And that's the direction of the Khilafat
[Amit Varma]: movement and Gandhi, of course, who is a true radical. And it's very interesting because
[Amit Varma]: what, and I'm just thinking aloud here, but it strikes me that the department that VP is now
[Amit Varma]: part of is pursuing the constitutional way. In the sense, piecemeal changes. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is a process, there is a system, nothing radical. And yet, at the end of his career,
[Amit Varma]: what he then has to do is something quite radical, where he has to sort of frame a new system almost
[Amit Varma]: by himself. I mean, that whole act of getting all the princes into the union is something that no
[Guest]: constitutional way will get you. Absolutely, absolutely. And I think it's important to
[Guest]: remember here that there was no one formula for what the constitutional way was at that point.
[Guest]: In the 1920s, 30s, you were just basically figuring it out. You know, you were people who
[Guest]: were basically sitting down around a table, you know, coming to several deadlocks along the way,
[Guest]: but you were essentially trying to talk it out. And you didn't really know what would happen,
[Guest]: you know, because, I mean, in the 30s, there was the idea of federal India.
[Guest]: By the 40s, the idea of federal India had been thrown out of the window. So events were moving
[Guest]: so blindingly fast that essentially you had to adapt your ideas according to the events that
[Guest]: were following and the fallout of the events that were following as well, you know, because in the
[Guest]: 30s, and I've talked about this in the book as well, where Horton Lewis basically introduces VP
[Guest]: to Linlithgow. And VP essentially, Linlithgow asks Horton Lewis, what is the way forward here?
[Guest]: And VP for the first time opens his mouth in front of the viceroy and says,
[Amit Varma]: take defense and external affairs from the prince. In fact, I'll read out the quote from your book.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. What VP says in this quote,
[Amit Varma]: if we get the princes to agree to hand over defense, foreign affairs and communications
[Amit Varma]: to the British government, our path might be smoother. We can leave finances out of the
[Amit Varma]: picture for now. They don't need to have any obligations towards the crown at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. This is 1935.
[Guest]: This is 1935. This is also a point where VP has realized that the princes are now backing away
[Guest]: from federation and that if Linlithgow doesn't act fast, the whole idea of federation might
[Guest]: fall through, right? So it's another example of how VP has taken the knowledge that he's
[Guest]: accumulated at a particular point and is using it in an adapted version at a later point in his
[Guest]: career. It's also a remarkable statement of great foresight because this essentially will be the
[Guest]: foundation of whatever he's prescribing through the years, right? So he's basically grasped this
[Guest]: in 1935, which is over a decade before actual independence.
[Amit Varma]: And in 47 for, you know, those listeners who don't know, this is exactly the package that
[Amit Varma]: was offered to all the princely states that only hand over defense, foreign affairs and
[Amit Varma]: communications. And you know, you otherwise are in control.
[Guest]: Absolutely. And this is like you said, this is 1935. The princes are now backing away from
[Guest]: federation. Linlithgow has essentially basically arrived in India to try and implement federation
[Guest]: as fast as possible. And VP offers him this formula. Linlithgow rejects it. And it is one
[Guest]: of the first times that VP has encountered ingrained racial prejudice as well as ingrained
[Guest]: systemic prejudice because Linlithgow is somebody who loves protocol and is almost a rabid fan of
[Guest]: protocol. He certainly doesn't like an Indian talking to him in this fashion. And it makes
[Guest]: matters worse that this is a junior. It is not anyone in a position of power.
[Amit Varma]: Although for all practical purposes, VP is already the right hand man of the reforms
[Guest]: commissioner, which is... It doesn't matter to Linlithgow.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter to Linlithgow because he's just seeing a native guy speaking out of turn.
[Guest]: Because, you know, I mean, VP would go to Linlithgow twice during Linlithgow's tenure
[Guest]: and put forward adapted versions of this. In 41, again, he would go to Linlithgow and
[Guest]: say this again. So he basically put himself out on the limb twice during Linlithgow's tenure in
[Guest]: India. And it never mattered to Linlithgow. It was a point that was of great and abiding
[Guest]: resentment for VP because he just felt that Linlithgow had basically thrown away chances of
[Guest]: putting together a unified India as far as it was possible by ignoring the plan that he had
[Guest]: actually put forward. Twice, not once, but twice. But going back to your original point,
[Guest]: I think we were just figuring out what was the constitutional way forward.
[Guest]: Because events were changing so fast, you had to have somebody who was thinking on his feet,
[Guest]: practically, because that was something that you needed. You needed somebody who had a brain that
[Guest]: was agile enough to adapt to the changing circumstances, assess the implications of
[Guest]: the circumstances and their consequences, and what that could mean for the future of the country,
[Guest]: and use that to formulate a process of constitutional reform. And I think the fact
[Guest]: that VP encountered supportive supervisors like Hawthorne Lewis, like in 1941, as he would
[Guest]: encounter Harry Hudson, it was incredibly formative and supportive for his career as well.
[Guest]: These were men who allowed him to think and allowed him to put forward his ideas and opinions.
[Guest]: In fact, in 37, Linlithgow would give VP carte blanche to go ahead and form the electoral
[Amit Varma]: rolls for the 1937 elections. Whereas you pointed out he included
[Amit Varma]: women in the rolls. That was the first time. And again,
[Amit Varma]: this was something he'd seen in 30. And in fact, this is the first time I read
[Guest]: about it. Has it really been remarked upon that? It hasn't. It's one line in The Great Divide by
[Guest]: Harry Hudson. And it's never really been remarked upon at all, which is, I think, another really sad
[Guest]: fallout of the fact that VP has been allowed language and obscurity all this time. Because
[Guest]: this is a change that continues until today, that has had a lasting effect on the way we look at our
[Guest]: voting rights. I mean, he would go ahead and give uneducated people the right to vote as well by
[Guest]: putting symbols onto ballot papers. So the hand and the jaru and all that is
[Guest]: all there because of VP. Yeah. And his whole idea of that stemmed
[Guest]: from his own experience. He never completed his education either, but he didn't see why that
[Guest]: should stop you from having a say in the direction in which your country goes. So, you know, he would
[Guest]: push for provincial governments to lower the average educational standard of an average voter
[Guest]: because he kept insisting, how does that matter? Just because you don't have a formal degree or a
[Guest]: formal piece of paper that determines your academic credentials doesn't mean that you don't have
[Guest]: opinions of where the country is going or where you want your country to go. So why should you
[Guest]: not have a say? And I think these are contributions that actually need to be highlighted much more
[Amit Varma]: than they have been done so far. And of course, you had rhetoric on these
[Amit Varma]: subjects in the political arena, but it took someone to actually sit down and frame these
[Amit Varma]: rules. Like you point out at the time of working on the Government of India Act in 1935, you write,
[Amit Varma]: quote, VP wondered whether anyone really realized the sheer amount of work that went into making a
[Amit Varma]: modern nation. It was all very well to make impassioned speeches about Swaraj, but the tedium
[Amit Varma]: and technicality that formed the cogs of these dreams and which would bring them to fruition
[Amit Varma]: was stupendous. And yet he clearly enjoyed juggling so many balls. It was in every way why he had
[Amit Varma]: persisted with government service. So tell me a bit about this period of time. What is the
[Amit Varma]: Government of India Act? What is VP's role on it? You know, and what is its sort of relevance and
[Guest]: resonance for future events? So the Government of India Act 1935 was essentially put in place
[Guest]: as a result of the ruminations of the roundtable conferences that had come before. The idea was
[Guest]: to basically put in place a federal India. We basically wanted a stronger center. We wanted
[Guest]: powers to be given to the center and the provinces basically were to accede to what would become a
[Guest]: federal India. The princes were given a choice at that point, but they were essentially told that
[Guest]: a united federal India could only succeed if half of the princes, of the total number of princes,
[Guest]: acceded to what would become the constituent assembly. The Government of India Act would
[Guest]: also become the backbone of India's constitutional progress until our own constitution of independent
[Guest]: India came into being in 1950. It was the constitution that would remain as a sort of
[Guest]: framework for VP's own ideas for the transfer of power later. VP's role here was essentially to
[Guest]: A, help in the drafting of the Act and B, supervise the elections that were to follow in
[Guest]: 1937 as a result of the Act. That was his mandate which was given to him by Hawthorne Lewis. Lewis
[Guest]: was not keeping very well at this point. He was very brilliant, but he was very sickly and the
[Guest]: upshot of that was that a lot of the legwork and paperwork was given to VP. Lewis felt that
[Guest]: since he had taken VP to London, VP had actually been there present at the conferences, at the
[Guest]: conference in 1930, that VP had enough first-hand knowledge to actually take on a burden of this
[Guest]: scale and scope. He would be there in a supervisory capacity, but he said, look,
[Guest]: if you can pull this off, we'll think about getting you a promotion. And this is, it also
[Guest]: might be remembered at this point that this is not a very easy time for VP personally.
[Guest]: 35 is also the year in which his first marriage was imploding. So this is a man who is completely
[Guest]: torn apart in his personal life, but has been given the task to start the process of constitutional
[Guest]: reform, actually ruling for India, right? Because the Government of India Act 35 is considered to
[Guest]: be one of the most substantial contributions to India's constitutional progress. And VP is not
[Guest]: unaware of the hugeness of the task he's been given. He basically throws himself into his work
[Guest]: at this point. Much of his work is incredibly tedious. And as I've said, tedium and technicality
[Guest]: are two aspects that will define his career, you know, right until the end of government service.
[Guest]: Because on the one hand, while it is very exciting to read about this in real time,
[Guest]: a lot of it was drafting, redrafting, submitting drafts, sending cables in the dead of night,
[Guest]: you know, and these are long, very lengthy cables that went into endless reams of clause A as sub
[Guest]: clause A.1. It went on for page after page. And, you know, you can get lost if you are a biographer
[Guest]: and you're reading this, you can very easily get lost in how completely mind numbing it is.
[Guest]: Because essentially, these are the same things that are being cabled to London and coming back
[Guest]: from London, but with the addition of one word or the subtraction of one word.
[Amit Varma]: So he's got to go through the whole thing again.
[Amit Varma]: And he's got to go through the whole thing again.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not Microsoft Word where changes are tracked and all of that.
[Guest]: He's got to read the full damn thing.
[Guest]: He's got to read the whole thing. And this is, he's got to then retype the whole thing,
[Guest]: right? Because that one word, its presence or its absence is essentially changing language.
[Guest]: It's changing implication. So this is a point that A can be seen with a lot of,
[Guest]: you can view it as a very boring period in his life, or you can look at it as somebody who has
[Guest]: moved on from the small scale to medium scale, right? This is the biggest he's come in his
[Guest]: career so far. He has no idea that he's actually going to go to the heights that he does go.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I wouldn't even call it medium scale because it's so mind boggling to me. It's a
[Amit Varma]: large scale in itself.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a large scale in itself. But you know, when you look at it,
[Amit Varma]: We know what comes later.
[Guest]: So, I mean, in retrospect, it is medium scale, but it's also medium scale in terms of sheer
[Guest]: hierarchy, right? Because he's superintendent of the reforms office at this point.
[Guest]: And he actually has overall charge, but his charge is so, it's so technical and it's so
[Guest]: heavily technical that to explain it in simple terms took some doing. Because you don't necessarily
[Guest]: think of it. I mean, right now, when I talk about the fact that he gave women the right to vote,
[Guest]: and he gave uneducated people the right to vote, that he pressured governments to lower
[Guest]: educational standards, it's actually a very simplistic sort of extraction of what he did
[Guest]: to sort of highlight his achievements. But that came mired in so much legalese and so many days
[Guest]: where he just, A, didn't sleep at all, B, he had to read the same thing until he, you know,
[Guest]: it was, you feel like you're going mad because you're reading the same thing over and over again.
[Guest]: So yes, this was a point of immense progress for India. But if you were in VP's position,
[Guest]: it was also a really tedious task, you know, because you were sitting behind the scenes and
[Guest]: you were going through reams and reams of paperwork. And none of that is exciting.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, at this point in time, VP doesn't have the responsibility as he would more than a
[Amit Varma]: decade later of actually dealing with all the princes at a personal level. But you have a very
[Amit Varma]: amusing anecdote about how Linlithgow decides to throw a sports meet in 1938, where he calls all
[Amit Varma]: the princes. Again, I'll quote from your book, quote, the result was a spectacular failure. The
[Amit Varma]: royals were neither young nor particularly sporty. The ruler of Garali, for instance,
[Amit Varma]: tried to relive his youth with a sprinting and extra long run up to bowl and suffered a heart
[Amit Varma]: attack in the process. No one wanted to discuss tiresome subjects like the abridgement of princely
[Amit Varma]: powers, grouping protocols and the consequences of democracy. The general mood was to finish
[Amit Varma]: off the week as fast as possible. So one could resume the usual routine, including the annual
[Amit Varma]: New Year's duck shoot at the nearby Isanagar Lake, said to be the best duck shoot in Bundelkhand.
[Amit Varma]: Stop good. I apologize if I'm making your book sound really boring, because actually it's full
[Amit Varma]: of really entertaining stuff like this, some of which I will also quote later. But let's talk for
[Amit Varma]: a moment about I mean, you could say, in this episode, we have been as guilty of ignoring VP's
[Amit Varma]: personal life as VP himself was. Tell me a bit about that. Like, okay, so he had an arranged
[Amit Varma]: marriage with someone in his village called Susheela. And that's all we know of her. And at
[Amit Varma]: the same time, what is sort of pertinent to all of this is a gentleman called Kotiath P. Anantan,
[Amit Varma]: who is, rewind here, the gentleman who gave him money for the ticket to Simla when he first came
[Amit Varma]: to Delhi after his pockets had been picked and they became close friends later. And he became
[Amit Varma]: very thick with both Kotiath P. Anantan and Kotiath's wife, Kanakam, who would later become
[Amit Varma]: his wife. Indeed. So kindly take us through what all is going on in his sort of personal life.
[Guest]: So let's rewind. It is 1914. Kotiath Anantan turns out to be the guy who's helped him to get to
[Guest]: Simla. Kotiath Anantan also encounters VP later and in a professional capacity. By later, I mean,
[Guest]: a few months later, right? Their friendship starts in 1914, which makes it that much easier,
[Guest]: I think, when you are an outside spectator to sort of have his personal life imbued with a lot of
[Guest]: rather salacious cues, should I say, you know, because you can make jokes about him marrying
[Guest]: his mentor's wife and stuff. But what I see here is... And she was only five years older than him.
[Guest]: She was only five years older than him. VP was not somebody who was very keen to get married.
[Guest]: He got married very reluctantly and under immense pressure from his mom. And most of us know that
[Guest]: story when it comes to us as well. But he succumbed to parental pressure. He
[Guest]: went, did the proper thing, got an arranged marriage. This woman's name was Sushila. And
[Guest]: that is literally all that we know about her. We know that she came from the same village. We know
[Guest]: that she came from quite a good family, was from the same caste. It was a marriage that did not
[Guest]: work. And she is, of course, your great grandmother. She is my great grandmother. She is.
[Guest]: I am descended from Sushila. And in fact, if Sushila hadn't gone on to have two children,
[Guest]: it might have been like she never existed. I don't know what happened during that marriage
[Guest]: or why it imploded. Strangely and even more bizarrely, neither does anyone else. There is
[Guest]: no evidence of what happened. She left behind no letters or if she did, they were destroyed.
[Guest]: We don't know. She walked out or seemingly walked out. Again, she disappeared. She left behind two
[Guest]: kids and two young kids. Like I said, my grandfather was nine. His brother was seven.
[Guest]: And, you know, she had those two kids. It might have been like she didn't exist. He allowed,
[Guest]: VP would allow no mention of her ever again. His children asked repeatedly where their mother had
[Guest]: gone and he never told them. And they never stopped looking for, they never stopped looking
[Guest]: for their mother. They never stopped trying to find her. It impacted their lives for years,
[Guest]: as understandably it would. What exactly transpired to actually destroy their marriage,
[Guest]: I don't know. Nobody remembers her. Only Mrs. VP Menon that is remembered is Kanakam.
[Guest]: Right. So, he met Kotiyath Ananthan and Kanakam 14 and they become firm friends.
[Guest]: Right. Kotiyath is years older than VP and together both Kanakam and Kotiyath represent
[Guest]: the kind of people that VP is trying to be. Right. So, they are aspirational. They live
[Guest]: in circumstances of very comfortable wealth. Kotiyath likes his cigars. Kotiyath likes his
[Guest]: pegs of whiskey. Kotiyath is extremely cultured as far as VP is concerned. Kanakam is from a very,
[Guest]: very unconventional family. One of her sisters was a fluent Sanskrit scholar. Yet another,
[Guest]: you know, obtained a license to fly. So, she's from a really out family that obviously did not
[Guest]: mind their daughters being out there in quite a flamboyant way. She has very decided, informed
[Guest]: opinions of her own. She has a great sense of humor. She cooks really great food. And theirs
[Guest]: becomes a house that is sort of a home away from home for VP. It's also a very parochial
[Guest]: mallu to mallu connection, which always works. He will always call Kanakam mummy.
[Guest]: Even after they're married. Even after they're married, that is something that continued all
[Guest]: their lives. And again, it's very easy to see why that can give rise to a lot of sort of
[Guest]: scandalous gossip because here you have a fellow calling his wife mummy. But in 35, when VP's first
[Guest]: marriage implodes, Kanakam is there. Right. She's actually moved in to VP's home with her daughter
[Guest]: Meenakshi. Kotiyath has died by this point. But here you have VP actually living with his
[Guest]: mentor's wife, her daughter and Sushila. The boys are away at school. Tongues are wagging
[Guest]: about this very unconventional setup because he's essentially living now with two women.
[Guest]: And Sushila disappears.
[Guest]: And Sushila now disappears. So, you just have VP and Kanakam left. So,
[Guest]: tongues are wagging even more. Right. So, this is an aspect of VP's life. He goes ahead and
[Guest]: formalizes a wedding in 1941, two years later. But for those two years, he is essentially what
[Guest]: we say today, living in sin. In 41 is when he will formalize that marriage. That is a marriage that
[Guest]: will last until the end of their lives. However convoluted the dynamic, it was also a very
[Guest]: quietly steadfast marriage. It was a marriage that did not rely too much on spoken sentiment,
[Guest]: but on almost sort of implicit understanding of who VP was and where he was going.
[Guest]: My family's recollections of Kanakam have always been of a woman who was very quiet,
[Guest]: but ensured that VP's work was never disturbed in any way. If he brought work home, for instance,
[Guest]: she would insist that the house ran very smoothly around him, but he was not to be disturbed. Tea,
[Guest]: coffee, food was sent in, he was not disturbed. So, she essentially made him the center of life
[Guest]: of the household and essentially became the anchor that he was very obviously looking for.
[Guest]: And I think that's one of the reasons why this was a marriage that worked. It was a marriage that
[Guest]: was inevitably shrouded with a lot of scandal, a lot of which has persisted until today. In fact,
[Guest]: when Wavell was Viceroy, he noticed that VP would not always, he wouldn't bring Kanakam to official
[Guest]: receptions and he generally just never brought her into public professional life. She remained
[Guest]: very much at home. And Wavell would ask VP, why are you doing that? Bring her next time.
[Guest]: And VP is slightly embarrassed that Wavell's noticed this. He tries to cover that up,
[Guest]: but he says, okay, fine. If you want me to bring her, I will. And he does bring her to an official
[Guest]: reception and Wavell does the immense honor of actually introducing VP and Kanakam first to the
[Guest]: guests of honor before proceeding to other equally much more important people in the room.
[Amit Varma]: Wavell was a kind man from all accounts.
[Guest]: Wavell was a very kind man and he was no politician, but he was a very kind, just man.
[Guest]: VP liked him very much. He felt he was incredibly unsuited to India's political climate and
[Guest]: politics, but a very just, fair man. But yes, his personal life has not been easy to write about as
[Guest]: well, because you had to basically, I had to basically sit down and look at this man's life
[Guest]: incredibly dispassionately. It's not always easy to talk about somebody who's related to you and
[Guest]: also dissect instances of emotional cruelty that they're capable of, cruelty slash stuntedness.
[Guest]: Especially to his kids who are, you know, one of them is your grandfather.
[Guest]: Yeah. So it's not a subject that you can write about easily or approach easily,
[Guest]: but at the same time, it was something that I felt needed to be done because you need to present
[Guest]: a portrait of a human being. VP Menon was capable of immense professional greatness,
[Guest]: not so much in his private life. And that goes towards contributing one comprehensive human
[Guest]: being. And I think both aspects were incredibly important to write about.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the story of our history is a story of incredibly flawed men. And there's a very nice
[Amit Varma]: domestic story in your book where you talk about how, you know, he's at this lunch meeting,
[Unknown]: and he's formulated the men and plan and it has to be done in four hours, the draft has to be,
[Amit Varma]: you know, sent off. And he hasn't had breakfast and it's lunchtime, but there's no time for lunch.
[Amit Varma]: So he takes his cronies and quickly goes home, where Kanakam asks him, do you want to have lunch?
[Amit Varma]: And he says, no, no, I can't, no time. And then she sulks and says, okay, I won't have lunch either.
[Guest]: And she goes off. Yeah, because this was also a point when VP was getting a lot of hate mail.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Which also struck me. This is the 1940s. There is no Twitter. He is getting hate mail.
[Guest]: He's getting hate mail. He's getting death threats. And Kanakam's taken a lot of this
[Guest]: in a stride. But this fact, the fact that, you know, he's been held up at work and he's
[Guest]: for the first time in years forgotten to phone her up and tell her he won't be home for lunch.
[Guest]: And if he will eat or not. Because he has to draft the plan, which will change India forever.
[Guest]: Right. So, but then she's pissed off, you know, because she thinks, why didn't you call me?
[Guest]: And, you know, he's standing there and he's wondering, do I go to pacify her or do I write
[Guest]: the plan that's going to change history? What do I do? He writes a plan. So he writes a plan
[Amit Varma]: that changes history. Fabulous. Yeah. So let's get back from the personal life now to sort of
[Amit Varma]: historical narrative and let's get into the 1940s. This is where things are really heating up. Britain
[Amit Varma]: has gone to war and the Indian politicians are pissed off because Linlithgow just unilaterally
[Amit Varma]: announced that India has joined the Second World War. And the Congress makes a series of blunders
[Amit Varma]: here. And what's also happening here, and it's also fascinating to see that unfold in the book,
[Amit Varma]: is that VP is getting closer and closer looks at key protagonists of our independence like Nehru
[Amit Varma]: and Patel and over time getting to know them a little better at the same time as Jinnah
[Amit Varma]: becomes a stranger to him again. And he's not entirely approving of everything that the Congress
[Guest]: is doing. Tell me a little bit about this period. I think it's inevitable that he would during the
[Guest]: process that he was going through, get a closer insight into the personalities of the men who
[Guest]: were shaping India's politics at that point. And this, he was getting a close look at both sides
[Guest]: of the divide. So he was getting a close look at the League, at the Congress, as well as the
[Guest]: princely states. So the late 1930s is also when he drafts the prototype of the instrument of
[Guest]: accession that he and Sardar Patel are going to use a decade later. He is also seeing princes
[Guest]: backing away from Federation. He's now also watching the Congress threatening to resign
[Guest]: its ministries. He doesn't approve of that idea at all. He feels that that's a stupid idea. He is
[Guest]: never entirely approving of many of the things that people do on both sides of the divide,
[Guest]: whether it's Nehru, whether it's Jinnah. For him, I suppose it's also easy for him to take
[Guest]: that judgment because he's watching these men make these decisions as the third party, right?
[Guest]: So he's essentially watching huge egos coming to blows with each other and often dominating
[Guest]: decisions that need to be taken in a cooler, more pragmatic way.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also especially, I guess, reflected in Jinnah and Nehru baiting each other all the
[Guest]: time, which makes a sort of a rapprochement very difficult.
[Guest]: It makes a rapprochement very difficult because essentially every olive branch that either party
[Guest]: hands out is struck aside. And you are fast approaching a point of deadlock. Where do you
[Guest]: go from here now? Pakistan is now a nascent sort of idea that's sort of floating around.
[Guest]: It's not entirely been picked up a hundred percent yet, even though Jinnah's gone ahead
[Guest]: and made the Lahore resolution. VP still believes that a unified India can still be pulled off
[Guest]: if people can just put aside their egos, if people can stop baiting each other.
[Guest]: A lot of his decisions at this point are also, for me, they read almost as acts of political
[Guest]: naivete because for someone who's been exposed to egos and exposed to differing personalities,
[Guest]: you must have been able to see the writing on the wall a lot earlier than VP did, right?
[Guest]: In 1941, he was still pushing for a unified India. He goes to Linlithgow one more time
[Guest]: and he says, we can still pull it together and make a unified federal India possible.
[Guest]: Again, Linlithgow doesn't listen to him. And these are points when he's seeing the flaws
[Guest]: of the greatest men of Indian politics come more and more glaringly into focus.
[Guest]: He is seeing Jinnah transform into the Jinnah of 1946-47 into an increasingly bitter, resentful,
[Guest]: cynical man. He is seeing Nehru make statements that really Nehru shouldn't do, that aren't
[Guest]: exactly politically wise. And he is, to a large extent, really annoyed because he can see where
[Guest]: this is going and yet he doesn't want to believe that it's going in that direction as yet. He does
[Guest]: not want to believe it. And I think the greatest example of that was his transfer of power plan in
[Guest]: 41. And we have another example of it as well when we come to 1945 and the Sinhala Conference.
[Guest]: And those are two key examples from the mid-1940s of VP Menon believing staunchly that India need
[Guest]: not head towards partition of Pakistan. For him, the interplay of personalities was a key reason
[Guest]: why India was greening towards the path that she was heading down. He'd never entirely, and for me,
[Guest]: it was entirely subjective. I know today it's very easy to categorize him as Sardar Patel's
[Guest]: right-hand man or as being in Patel's camp. But in the late 1930s, early 1940s, he hadn't yet
[Guest]: encountered Sardar Patel. He hardly knew Patel. He hardly knew Patel, right? So, these were
[Guest]: independent assessments that he'd made. These were subjective assessments that he made based on how
[Guest]: these men were reacting to propositions for India's political future. They were assessments of
[Guest]: human beings. They were assessments of how men could easily wreck or capsize a political boat
[Guest]: if they weren't careful. And this is, I think, something that comes across very strongly in the
[Guest]: interviews that he did with Hodgson because there he's actually talking about interacting with these
[Guest]: political legends as men. He's essentially deconstructing them as personalities with
[Guest]: flaws, which often blinded them to the greater good of the country. He never agreed with the
[Guest]: fact that the Congress resigned from the ministries in 39. And that was something that
[Guest]: he would hold right to the end of his government career. In fact, it is a statement that he makes
[Guest]: obliquely in Transfer of Power as well. He's far more colourful about it in his interviews.
[Guest]: But it was something he kept his mouth shut about until he absolutely could give free rein to his
[Guest]: tongue. It was important for me to see that he didn't actually hold these people in awe. He was
[Guest]: able to see them as men capable of small behaviour, insular behaviour. And he could rage about this.
[Guest]: You know, in fact, when Linlithgow sent three emissaries to the princely states in 37,
[Guest]: he would get really annoyed with that because he said that's the first step towards actually
[Guest]: making Federation fall through. You're essentially sending these men, poor Englishmen, to princely
[Guest]: states to tell them, look, essentially, your days are numbered here. We are going to be leaving and
[Guest]: this is going to be your future. He didn't agree with that at all. He didn't feel like it should
[Guest]: have been done. Later on, when the Cripps mission failed in 42, Stafford Cripps actually meets VP
[Guest]: and says, Mr. Menon, look, the greatest service you could do for this country is you could make
[Guest]: a coalition happen between the Congress and the League. That might be the only way forward here.
[Guest]: And those become words that actually push him towards setting up the Simla Conference.
[Guest]: And the letter for that conference actually exists still in the National Archives.
[Guest]: And it is, to me, yet another example of how VP was learning to navigate different personalities.
[Guest]: It is a very long, very elaborate letter, lays out the blueprint for the Simla Conference.
[Guest]: In it, he does not take any credit for putting across this idea. He basically says the viceroys
[Guest]: should get political stakeholders around a common table, have them in the same room,
[Guest]: talk about it, and then push forward from there. He is just to be there in a supervisory capacity.
[Guest]: The actual discussion has to be done between those who are actively interested in India's
[Guest]: political future. But what is clever about this letter is that he's actually giving
[Guest]: Wavell, who was sitting viceroy at that point, the authority to go ahead with this. He was putting it
[Guest]: across as if it should be Wavell's idea. It should be Wavell who goes out there and gets this done.
[Guest]: At no point does he say, I feel that this should be done. At no point does he push it. In his own
[Guest]: official narrative, in fact, he has not taken credit for this at all. It is merely written as
[Guest]: Wavell arranged the Simla Conference. It's only when you actually read that letter that you
[Guest]: realize that it was not Wavell, it was actually VP Menon who pushed for the Simla Conference.
[Guest]: Because at that point, he was still fervently hoping that both parties could actually put
[Guest]: aside their differences and sit down and actually look at the future of India.
[Guest]: And at this point, there were several other factors that were going on behind the scenes.
[Guest]: So you had people like Robert Mudi, who was within the Home Department at that point. He
[Guest]: was Home Member. And he was also very pro-Pakistan. And he was somebody VP suspected of basically
[Guest]: poisoning Jinnah's ear, letting him know that the only way out and the only way forward for
[Guest]: the Muslim League to actually start catering to Muslim interests was to push for Pakistan.
[Guest]: And this is something that Jinnah tells Durga Das, who is working with the Hindustan Times at
[Guest]: that point, at the Simla Conference. And he tells Durga Das, he says, why do I need to sit here when
[Guest]: Pakistan is being handed to me on a platter? Why do I need to listen to these people?
[Guest]: And he goes ahead and basically puts forward a lot of unreasonable proposals to Wavell and says
[Guest]: that basically all Muslim interests will be held by the League, represented by the League. And
[Guest]: that's not something Wavell can agree with. And it's one of the things that capsizes the
[Guest]: Simla Conference. Yet another thing that capsizes further political interest is later when the
[Guest]: cabinet mission has departed. In 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru gives a press conference on the 10th of
[Guest]: July, in which he says that we are not going to support grouping at all. No one here is going to
[Guest]: support grouping, so obviously that's going to fall through. And VP is livid because he says,
[Guest]: you know, why did Nehru have to go and make that kind of a statement? Obviously, now Jinnah is
[Guest]: going to pull out and this is going to come to nothing. And Jinnah is forced to pull out because
[Guest]: if Nehru is condemning this, there's no way the League can say yes. So essentially speaking, VP
[Guest]: is at this point sitting now very much at the front lines. His position has subtly changed
[Guest]: because in 43, Harry Hodson leaves. And Harry Hodson leaves behind a very strong letter of
[Guest]: recommendation saying, look, there is no one better qualified to take up the position of
[Guest]: reforms commissioner than VP Menon. And he is the first non-Englishman to...
[Guest]: He is the first non-Englishman to be reforms commissioner without having sat for the ICS exams.
[Guest]: So he has now reached pinnacles of his career that he didn't think were possible. So from 43
[Guest]: onwards, from 43, 44, 45 here, and as reforms commissioner, he's basically pushing for some
[Guest]: kind of agreement that can possibly happen before it's too late. It's only in 46, 45,
[Guest]: 46 that he begins to see that it's not possible. From 46, he is absolutely convinced that
[Guest]: partition is inevitable. We'll have any plan that we put forward now, we'll have to cater
[Guest]: to partition and Pakistan. There is no way we can't. And a large part of that he ascribes to
[Guest]: Nehru's press conference of July 1946. In fact, all of that, all these years,
[Amit Varma]: the first half of the 40s are beautifully detailed in your book and a must read.
[Amit Varma]: You know, before I go on to the sort of larger questions I want to ask, including about,
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure what our listeners are waiting for, the Patel versus Nehru relationship and how we look
[Amit Varma]: at history today. But before I get to those larger questions, I also want to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: briefly cover the sort of two other big moments in VP's career. And one is, of course, when
[Amit Varma]: Mountbatten comes. And, you know, VP has been a very important part of the administration till
[Amit Varma]: now. He's a reforms commissioner and all of that. But Mountbatten has just come with his own guys,
[Amit Varma]: some of them incompetent. And in VP's words, when he describes the early part of Mountbatten's
[Amit Varma]: tenure in India, quote, I was just there to do donkey's work. If they needed a paper drafted,
[Amit Varma]: or if they had no time to do something, then it was understood that VP would do it. But if they
[Amit Varma]: had to take decisions, then they would hold meetings without me and take those decisions
[Amit Varma]: themselves. It was a most frustrating situation, stop quote. And part of it could be ingrained
[Amit Varma]: racism and you know, what would the natives know and all of that rubbish. But in no time at all,
[Amit Varma]: he is absolutely crucial to Mountbatten, the one person that Mountbatten relies upon.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about how the shift happened and why it happened. What did VP bring to the
[Guest]: table? This was actually a very sort of very complex period in VP's professional life,
[Guest]: because backtracking to about the autumn of 1946, it was a milestone for VP because it is the autumn
[Guest]: of 1946 that he encounters Sardar Patel for the first time. And that is something that is going
[Guest]: to have a huge impact on his career going forward. Sardar Patel has obviously heard of VP Menon,
[Guest]: never met him. But in no time, they forge a relationship that is very professional,
[Guest]: but also hugely personal. And it is in December of 1946 that VP actually submits yet another
[Guest]: transfer of power plan. This time it is based on transfer of power and dominion status to two
[Guest]: central governments. It is catering for Pakistan and partition in the most viable way possible.
[Guest]: That plan has Sardar Patel's approval. It is submitted to Wavell. It is then sent to Whitehall.
[Guest]: Again, it is brushed aside, but it is one of the plans that Mountbatten will look at
[Guest]: as part of his briefs for going out to India. Mountbatten comes with a reputation that precedes
[Guest]: him. He is incredibly flashy. He loves the limelight. He is somebody who believes that he
[Guest]: can, he's basically sent there as somebody who can do this single-handedly. He comes with a
[Guest]: hand core group of English officials whom he feels can basically steer the country towards
[Guest]: transfer of power. And they can basically see to this in a bloodless way and get out of there as
[Guest]: soon as possible. And as yet it might be remembered that the transfer of power date is still 1948.
[Guest]: It's not come up to 1947 as yet. So Mountbatten basically comes out and VP is not consulted about
[Guest]: any of it. Mountbatten meets with various political stakeholders, puts together what is now known as
[Guest]: Plan Balkan, which was essentially transferring power on a completely voluntary basis. It was
[Guest]: essentially leaving the accession to a dominion of India on a voluntary basis. And it was leaving
[Guest]: the door open for princely states to do as they pleased. So you could have 500 independent
[Guest]: countries coming up within the country. This was the plan that was sent ahead to Whitehall. This
[Guest]: was the plan that VP says was never shown to him. And it was a plan that VP knew was being made.
[Guest]: He was just never shown the final draft. And that is one of the last straws for VP. He threatens
[Guest]: to resign. Edwina Mountbatten steps in at this point and she calls him up and she says,
[Guest]: are you okay? What's wrong? And he says, madam, you've got a sitting reforms commissioner and
[Guest]: a constitutional advisor also in me. And I'm not being allowed to do my job. So it might be best
[Guest]: if I just step down. So she says, you know what, just relax. I'll speak to Dickie, which is
[Guest]: Mountbatten's pet name. And she does speak to Dickie. And he's called up, VP's then called up
[Guest]: to Simla in the May of 1947. And it's actually May of 1947 that both the transfer of power movement
[Guest]: gets a huge impetus with his presence because it is now that he actually puts forward his own plan
[Guest]: for the transfer of power that he's been putting forward so unsuccessfully for the last few years.
[Guest]: He now puts across what will become the Men in Plan. And that is, again, catering to transfer
[Guest]: of power and dominion status. It's dealing with the partition of Bengal and Punjab as well. And
[Guest]: it is the plan that has the approval of Sardar. And he didn't outrightly tell Mountbatten that he's
[Guest]: got the approval of Sardar, but he basically said that he knew the Congress would carry it through.
[Guest]: Mountbatten here says, okay, look, Nehru is coming up with Krishna Menon. Why don't you go
[Guest]: and tell him about this plan? See what he has to say. And VP goes to Nehru. And this is the point
[Guest]: where things become incredibly embarrassing for VP because he knows that a plan has gone ahead to
[Guest]: Whitehall. He's been instructed by Mountbatten not to let Nehru know about Plan Balkan. So he
[Guest]: goes to Nehru. He basically outlines the Men in Plan. Nehru accepts the Men in Plan and VP knew
[Guest]: he would accept it because if Sardar had accepted it, there was an excellent chance that Nehru
[Guest]: would accept it as well, which Nehru did. The only thing was Nehru didn't know the Plan Balkan
[Guest]: had gone ahead. Plan Balkan came back, you know, a couple of days later. It had some changes to it.
[Guest]: The quality and quantity of those changes remain disputed as to what extent they were modified.
[Guest]: But the revised plan was shown to Nehru by Mountbatten because Mountbatten had a hunch
[Guest]: that Nehru might not like it. Nehru did not like it. In fact, Nehru freaked out about it.
[Guest]: And Nehru was in an understandably in a complete rage because his reforms commissioner and
[Guest]: constitutional advisor had given him another plan altogether. This was some other plan
[Guest]: that was threatening to basically balkanize India and he didn't know what the hell was going on.
[Guest]: So he called VP the next morning and basically lost his temper at VP and on a grand scale.
[Guest]: And VP is basically standing there having to listen to Nehru rage at him. He doesn't know
[Guest]: that Plan Balkan has been shown to Nehru. So he's having to defend something that he knows is
[Guest]: untrue. And he knew everything that he was saying would sound untrue. And on his tapes to Harry
[Guest]: Hodson, he says that and his voice is very resigned when he says it. He says, you know,
[Guest]: I don't blame Panditji. You know, there he was understandably upset with the reforms commissioner
[Guest]: who was seeming to not know about any plan that had gone ahead. How could his reforms commissioner
[Guest]: not know? How is that even possible? So obviously it looked like I was telling lies when I wasn't.
[Guest]: Right. So, I mean, this was a point when for VP, it started the downturn of his relationship with
[Guest]: Nehru. Nehru would never fully hundred percent trust VP after that. And I think for many reasons,
[Guest]: VP didn't really blame Nehru for that particular episode alone, because it was understandable for
[Guest]: Jawaharlal Nehru to be completely infuriated by the fact that here were two different plans being
[Guest]: shown to him and a reforms commissioner who was pretending, it seemed to Nehru, that he didn't
[Guest]: know anything about it. And it was a point where admittedly VP had submitted what became the Menon
[Guest]: Plan, but it also was a point where his relationship with Nehru took a straight nosedive.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, while reading the book, one very interesting thing struck me
[Amit Varma]: that for his entire career, VP is working with the British empire. He's very much part of the
[Amit Varma]: British empire. And at certain points in time, all of these politicians who are our founders and who
[Amit Varma]: will be his colleagues later on in time, Nehru, Patel and so on, are almost adversaries in
[Amit Varma]: different contexts, depending on how you look at it. And then he switches from sort of working with
[Amit Varma]: the empire, which is the force that they're fighting, to actually working with them. And it
[Amit Varma]: happens really smoothly. Like, of course, while he's reforms commissioner with Wawel and later with
[Amit Varma]: Mountbatten, he also becomes close to Sardar Patel, you know, because he admires his practicality and
[Amit Varma]: so on and all of that is happening. And here the double role almost becomes formalized when Patel
[Amit Varma]: asks him to join the state's department. You know, tell me a little bit about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what that was like, because this is now sort of a crazy challenge. In fact, I'll, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the challenge, of course, is to bring all the princes into the union. And you have so many
[Amit Varma]: colorful things to say about this period that I don't even know which bits to quote, but I'll
[Amit Varma]: begin with this quote, the princes of India were a fascinating study in eccentricity. They were
[Amit Varma]: hedonistic, imperious and flamboyant. Some rules state size of Germany, others lauded it over tiny
[Amit Varma]: specs, the size of pocket handkerchiefs. The last decade of the Raj was halcyon in their memories.
[Amit Varma]: Nearly every ruler remembers armies of retainers, solid gold plates at dinner, chakkas of polo,
[Amit Varma]: jewels by Qatiyar and coffers overflowing with diamonds, rubies, emeralds and gold.
[Amit Varma]: They had been for the most part, willing vassals of the British, stop quote. And then of course,
[Amit Varma]: you go on to give details about how sort of the British gave them honorifics and some were called
[Amit Varma]: highness. And, you know, the Nizam of Hyderabad was called his exalted highness to elevate him
[Amit Varma]: above the mere highnesses. And they had different kinds of gun salutes, which became an ego issue.
[Amit Varma]: I particularly like some of them like Maharaja Vibhuti Narayan Singh of Benares were deeply
[Amit Varma]: religious. When he visited the Nawab of Rampur, he insisted that the first object that met his
[Amit Varma]: gaze in the morning should be a cow. This put the Nawab, whose guests apartment were on the
[Amit Varma]: first floor in a quandary. The matter was resolved by borrowing a crane from a nearby sugar factory.
[Amit Varma]: Every morning, I have to laugh. Every morning, an astonished cow was hoisted up to the windows of
[Amit Varma]: the Maharaja suite, there to dangle until his highness chose to wake up and settle his royal
[Amit Varma]: gaze upon the hapless cow, stop quote. And then the book is full of such crazy stuff,
[Amit Varma]: which is why it's also in parts and such an entertaining read. I mean, the mind boggles,
[Amit Varma]: like if this task was to come in front of me that you have to talk to 585 princely states and get
[Amit Varma]: them all to sign, I would just freeze. What is Patel and VP's approach to this? And why is VP
[Guest]: so important to Patel for this? So, like I said, Patel has met VP during the autumn of 46. He has
[Guest]: heard of VP's reputation. It doesn't take long for VP to become invaluable to Patel. They would
[Guest]: essentially start the day essentially together. VP would go over to Patel's residence on Aurangzeb
[Guest]: Road and he would first brief Patel in the mornings. And this is long before he was in
[Guest]: the state's ministry. This is in 46 itself. They would meet again in the evenings. There would be
[Guest]: a lot of phone calls in between. So, it was an almost obsessively close professional
[Guest]: relationship that they shared right from the get-go. By 47, when VP has submitted the Menon
[Guest]: Plan, there are other machinations also in play. So, Sardar Patel has been talking to the princes
[Guest]: much before 47. You know, the task of talking to the princes has not been something that the
[Guest]: Government of India actually ever stopped doing. The Chamber of Princes has been incredibly
[Guest]: influential in trying to put across its views to where they wanted their royal houses to be. And
[Guest]: these are houses that trace their lineage back to Vedic eras, to the sun and the moon, you know,
[Guest]: to various outlandish ideas in order to legitimize their sovereignty. But Patel has been deploying
[Guest]: a method of personal diplomacy also. There have been lunches with various princes. There have
[Guest]: been dinner receptions, ways in which he could essentially woo them out of official settings.
[Guest]: Gopalaswamy Iyengar was incredibly influential there as well. In the beginning of 47, for
[Guest]: instance, when the States Negotiating Committee, which was the first step towards an official
[Guest]: states ministry, the Negotiating Committee actually sat down between February and March
[Guest]: before Clement Attlee's declaration that Mountbatten would be coming out and India would
[Guest]: be independent. And the States Negotiating Committee's job was to sit down with major
[Guest]: royal houses and essentially start discussing the way forward once paramountcy lapsed.
[Guest]: Now, Sardar Patel actually, the transcripts of those are available in the Gopalaswamy Iyengar
[Guest]: papers in Teen Moorthi. And it's a fascinating read because essentially speaking, these are
[Guest]: acrimonious discussions, right? Some of them, like there was a dinner on 31st of January,
[Guest]: 1947 at Bikaner House. And that was a fairly cordial dinner. Nehru was there, Patel, Iyengar,
[Guest]: major princes Bikaner, Baroda, C.P. Ramaswamy Iyer from Travancore. And it was a fairly
[Guest]: cordial dinner. Princes essentially had a few concerns about where the future was heading.
[Guest]: Jawaharlal Nehru was very clear when he said, look, we want to talk to you. We want to essentially
[Guest]: listen to what you have to say and then take the future forward as it unfolds.
[Guest]: The minutes of the negotiating committee read very differently, right? So you have the principal
[Guest]: proponents like Hamidullah Khan, who was the Nawab of Bhopal and the sitting chancellor of the
[Guest]: Chamber of Princes. Hamidullah Khan was no fan of the lapse of paramountcy. And he was even less a
[Guest]: fan of an idea for a state's ministry. And he actually was trying to prevent a lot of his
[Guest]: brethren from joining an independent union of India. He felt that they should basically stand
[Guest]: independently. Sardar Patel actually says something that I found quite significant. He says,
[Guest]: to the extent to which you hand over your powers, there will be no question of taking over your
[Amit Varma]: powers. Which is basically saying, if you don't hand over your powers, we take it away. So deal
[Guest]: with it. Essentially, right? So he's basically made his intentions very clear. So he's deploying
[Guest]: set tactic, personal charm, as well as implicit threats. The carrots and the sticks. You come
[Amit Varma]: with us, you will get your privy purses, we'll look after you. But you don't come with us. Listen,
[Guest]: we are moving in any way and you may end up with nothing. Absolutely. So this is this precedent
[Amit Varma]: that's already set in motion, right? And technically, what are the choices open under law
[Amit Varma]: to the princes now? Technically, they can opt for independence or India or Pakistan. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: that's basically it. So these are the choices open to them. These are the choices. But what
[Amit Varma]: India's stand really is that, listen, you better come with us. Otherwise, you know, I mean, your
[Amit Varma]: initial thing is that you won't be able to survive on your own. So why don't you come with us?
[Guest]: But if you don't come with us, you know, it's going to happen anyway. There are several layers
[Guest]: here as well, you know, because the British did have independent treaties with these princely
[Guest]: states as well, right? So when you were basically moving towards partition and you were moving
[Guest]: towards a set transfer of power, you basically had a lot of councils, a lot of committees that
[Guest]: were set up to oversee this. One of them was expert committee number nine on foreign relations,
[Guest]: which the sole job of which was to deconstruct where British legal treaties with these princely
[Guest]: states stood, how many of these clauses would carry over after independence, right? So that
[Guest]: was one aspect that was continuing. VP Menon's overall aspect, overall task with the Ministry
[Guest]: of States was the mandate was very different. The mandate was a driving force to basically present
[Guest]: independent India as a stable, cohesive unit, right? So there were states that were going to give
[Guest]: trouble, which was strategically, for instance, on the borders with Pakistan. There were states that
[Guest]: were minerally rich, but also incredibly strategically important as well, like Hyderabad.
[Guest]: There was Kashmir. There were 500 odd of these states scattered across the country. The driving
[Guest]: force for VP would be to not let the country dissolve into complete chaos after transfer of
[Guest]: power had been affected and partition had been carried out, because you could actually send
[Guest]: international perception either way, right? He didn't want, and this is something that he alludes
[Guest]: to quite frequently. If you read the story of the integration of the states, it's a sentence that
[Guest]: keeps coming back in every other chapter, that they did not want India to be portrayed as anything
[Guest]: else other than a stable, solid unit of governance. And for those reasons, integration was very
[Guest]: important. Anyway, that was much later in the future. In June 1947, Sardar Patel basically
[Guest]: calls VP and says, we're thinking of setting up a ministry of states. I'm going to be minister
[Guest]: of states. I want you to be my deputy. And this is a shocker for VP because he's been working for
[Guest]: years now. He wants a break. He wants to be transferred to governor of a province where he
[Guest]: can earn a bit more money and relax a little bit. But here is Sardar insisting that, look, I want
[Guest]: you. I don't want anyone else. And by this point, they are more friends than they are professional
[Amit Varma]: allies. And VP at this point knows the procedures, knows how to draft law, knows all the princes.
[Amit Varma]: Yes. And knows the real politic of how to talk to whom and to get things done and to get people at
[Amit Varma]: a table together to agree on stuff. Absolutely.
[Guest]: So he's key. He's key, which is what Sardar Patel sees. What VP sees, which I found rather touching
[Guest]: was the fact that the first thing he thought about, apart from being really exhausted,
[Guest]: was the fact that this would be the first time that he would actually be working with Sardar
[Guest]: Patel. He had been Sardar Patel's sort of key man, but this would actually see them working
[Guest]: together. And he kept thinking, what if this impaired their friendship? Right? And I found
[Guest]: that a really refreshingly honest sort of think about at this juncture, right? You're being handed
[Guest]: a position of immense and key power. And that's literally the first thing that comes to your mind.
[Guest]: What if it affects our friendship down the line? Right? What if we can't work together? What if
[Guest]: we are people who have very different ways of functioning and we don't really get along?
[Guest]: And Sardar Patel essentially says, forget all that. Just come on board. We'll make it work.
[Guest]: And so that happens in June, but he can't take over as yet because he's still constitutional
[Guest]: advisor. He has to see those duties through first. So like I said, he is working currently
[Guest]: with three other men, Sir George Spence, KVK Sundaram and SVR Cook to basically put together
[Guest]: the Indian Independence Bill, which will become the Indian Independence Act. And that is basically,
[Guest]: it's legalizing partition. It's legalizing the formation of Pakistan. It is essentially
[Guest]: the document, though it's only about maybe 20 clauses in total, and it's a fairly tidy little
[Guest]: document. It is essentially the document that's going to be central to transfer of power.
[Guest]: And like I said earlier, these were four men and they were basically given the task of
[Guest]: dismantling British rule in a matter of weeks, right? So he had to first finish this task.
[Guest]: In July, 1947, he basically, he joins the ministry of states as secretary. He takes
[Guest]: over on the 5th of July and his brain has to automatically shift gears because now you're
[Guest]: thinking not just of transfer of power, but you're also thinking of accession, right?
[Guest]: This accession is a subject that's, like I said, been talked about for a while now. The
[Guest]: procedure that Sardar Patel has set in motion has been basically to try and get as many princes on
[Guest]: board the constituent assembly as he can, right? So by the 28th of April, a lot of princely houses
[Guest]: have seen the light and they've joined the constituent assembly. They're taken care of.
[Guest]: There are states that are promising to be troublesome, Travancore, Hyderabad, Junagadh.
[Guest]: These are states that aren't willing to be taken down so easily. So there now begins a sort of
[Guest]: mental shift in gears because now VP has to see to it that before 15th of August, which is less
[Guest]: than one month left, he has to basically see to it that he can get as many more apart from
[Guest]: Travancore, Hyderabad, Junagadh on board with accession and with signing the instrument of
[Guest]: accession as he can before the 15th of August. After that, it's anybody's guess where anything
[Guest]: will go. Here again, I find the role of personalities comes and the role of power play also becomes
[Guest]: immensely central to this narrative because the way that VP also utilized power and utilized
[Guest]: the usage of power was incredibly fascinating. So for instance, as far as Mountbatten was
[Guest]: concerned, both VP and Patel knew that any idea that was given to Mountbatten had to be presented
[Guest]: in such a way that Mountbatten thought that it was his idea. So basically on the 25th of July,
[Guest]: when the last chamber of princes is held and Mountbatten addresses these guys, it is essentially
[Guest]: Mountbatten being sent by VP to talk to the princes, tell them that their days are numbered
[Guest]: and it might be best. Mountbatten's come there thinking that it's basically his idea and he's
[Guest]: basically doing this and it is one of his last great acts as viceroy if he can convince these
[Guest]: princes. That's one aspect. Another really wonderful little anecdote that I had is,
[Guest]: there is this ball that's given by Mountbatten on the 28th of July, right? And all the princes
[Guest]: are present and those that are hesitant to exceed are taken by Mountbatten's ADCs first
[Guest]: to Mountbatten and then they are conducted across the room to Sardar Patel by VP Menon.
[Guest]: And it is almost naked display of the flowchart of power, how power is being distributed and
[Guest]: actually who in the room holds power, right? And that is something that VP is quite smug about,
[Guest]: right? If you read the story of the integration of the states also, it's quite a smug little
[Guest]: sentence where he says that nobody missed how the flow of power was actually being played out.
[Guest]: We basically wanted them to see that and they did. And the Raja of Sarela was present and he said,
[Guest]: nobody missed it. Nobody who was there could have failed to notice that these are the men who are
[Guest]: in power. And apart from the Viceroy, the actual men in the government of India who hold power,
[Amit Varma]: Sardar Patel and VP Menon. And, you know, your book obviously has a lot of fascinating detail
[Amit Varma]: on how they converted the princes and chapters on Junagadh, Hyderabad and Kashmir, which I've
[Amit Varma]: also dealt with in an excellent episode, which will be linked from the show notes in my episode
[Amit Varma]: on Kashmir with Srinath Raghavan. A thought that kind of struck me as I was reading this
[Amit Varma]: was that on the one hand, VP Menon shifted from working for the British empire to working for
[Amit Varma]: those who were his adversaries. But on the other hand, it almost seemed as if he shifted from one
[Amit Varma]: empire to another and from being freedom fighters, what people like Patel, Nehru and so on were now
[Amit Varma]: doing was putting together an empire of their own because these were all sort of princely states
[Amit Varma]: and by hook or by crook, they were sort of being united. It is not as if the will of the people
[Amit Varma]: was being ascertained anywhere. You were preying on the egos and the weaknesses of individual
[Amit Varma]: princes and kings. And one thing that you have pointed out in your book that Patel and Menon
[Amit Varma]: were very specific about is that whatever promises we make to these people, whatever agreements we
[Amit Varma]: make for why they agree to join the union, we must honor them. You even point out arguments
[Amit Varma]: that Patel had to that effect with Nehru who didn't really care so much about it. And in the
[Guest]: end, India did betray them all, didn't it? Decades later, yes, India did. What I really
[Guest]: want to point out is that at this point, after independence actually takes place on the 15th of
[Guest]: August, we see a shift from accession to integration. And those are two very different
[Guest]: processes that we piece involved with. Now it's no longer about whether or not you get princes to
[Guest]: sign the dotted line, but it just becomes nakedly about they have to sign on the dotted line.
[Guest]: And now is when you actually get to see how he uses Sardar Patel's own tactics. He's seen Sardar
[Guest]: Patel deploy a mix of personal as well as hard ruthlessness whenever it was required. These are
[Guest]: the same tactics that VP will use later on as well. In fact, the process of actual integration
[Amit Varma]: starts with Orissa and Chhattisgarh. And you point out interestingly how
[Amit Varma]: VP's tactical plan is he'll go to Orissa first himself. And if he fails, Sardar Patel will come,
[Amit Varma]: because that's his whole good cop, bad cop kind of tactic. And Sardar Patel says, no,
[Guest]: no, let's go together. And they somehow make it work. They somehow do make it work. And, you know,
[Guest]: you see Sardar Patel taking a definite backseat and letting VP do the work, right? Because they
[Guest]: have to go to Nagpur the next day. And they have a limited amount of time in which they can get
[Guest]: a number of princes in that room to be okay with the fact that a merger is going to happen.
[Guest]: And Sardar Patel is also having health issues. He has literally two heart attacks during this time.
[Guest]: One that kind of incapacitates him and the other which eventually...
[Guest]: Absolutely. In fact, when VP was basically carrying this out, Sardar Patel was sitting
[Guest]: on a train and basically waiting for VP to finish up and join him on board the train.
[Guest]: So essentially these machinations were done by VP, right? So he basically met these princes
[Guest]: and they were princes that had bickered among each other for the longest period of time.
[Guest]: And he actually had to single out one particular ruler, the Maharaja Dhankanal, and basically tell
[Guest]: him, look... And Dhankanal was not a popular ruler. He'd been thrown out of his own state twice
[Guest]: and he hadn't been yet reinstated. And VP tells him, look, we'll give you special privileges.
[Guest]: In return for that, what you have to go and do is unite your brother rulers,
[Guest]: tell them to sign on the dotted line and be okay with this. If you can do that,
[Guest]: we'll make this work for you. So it was a sort of, I'll scratch your back if you scratch mine,
[Guest]: right? And it worked. But you see the primary motivation for the integration of Odisha and
[Guest]: Chhattisgarh was Hyderabad and the trouble that was brewing in Hyderabad. So VP had heard that
[Guest]: the Nizam spies were essentially wanting to abduct the boy king of Bastar, which was incredibly
[Guest]: mineral rich, but also adjacent between Hyderabad and Odisha and Chhattisgarh. And if that was
[Guest]: there, and if that happened, then trouble that was simmering in Hyderabad would spill over into
[Guest]: Odisha and Chhattisgarh. So basically that becomes a sort of driving factor for him to go to Odisha
[Guest]: first before they go anywhere else. That is why Odisha and Chhattisgarh is chosen. So essentially
[Guest]: speaking, a lot of what is driving the integration process is a desire to stitch together the country
[Guest]: into one cohesive fabric and do it as strategically as possible. Some of the stuff that I've had to
[Guest]: actually leave out in my book, because otherwise I can't talk about 565 states. But what I noticed
[Guest]: when I was writing this book was it was driven by that strategy so implicitly that Sardar Patel,
[Guest]: for instance, didn't want to, at that point, look at states like Tripura or Kuch Bihar. These were
[Guest]: smaller states. While the threat of Pakistan was certainly imminent, particularly from the east,
[Guest]: Sardar Patel essentially felt that if these were states where it could be put off until it
[Guest]: absolutely had to be done, let it simmer for a while. We have to deal with states that constitute
[Guest]: the core of the country first and stitch together as much as we can first before dealing with
[Guest]: smaller, possibly less significant states. And for much of it, as I've said, Sardar Patel was not
[Guest]: doing so well health-wise. Much of the legwork, in fact, all of the legwork was done by VP.
[Guest]: And we talk about Kashmir, Hyderabad and Junagadh because they're the easiest to talk about,
[Guest]: they're the most controversial to talk about, and they're very richly told histories as well.
[Guest]: But essentially speaking for me, what was fascinating was you had to deal with 500-odd
[Guest]: rulers. You had to get 500 different houses on board by hook or by crook, as you said. You had
[Guest]: to deploy a mixture of charm, ruthlessness, plain threatening, you know, to get them to sign on the
[Guest]: dotted line. There were people who refused to see the light. The Maharaja of Indore, for instance,
[Guest]: just refused to sign. You know, a delegation of princes went to meet him to tell him, look,
[Guest]: you have to sign. There is no way out of this. And he refuses to listen to them. They're sitting in
[Guest]: the drawing room in his home. And he comes out of an antechamber facing the drawing room and he
[Guest]: looks at them and basically goes up the stairs in silence. And he's basically written several
[Guest]: letters to VP and Patel demanding to know what Pakistan's terms for accessions are, accessionists.
[Guest]: Can you look at those? And Patel and VP refused to cover this. And several days later, right before
[Guest]: the transfer of power takes place, VP gets a manila envelope in which Holkar has essentially
[Guest]: signed the instrument of accession and sent it just with no covering letter, nothing. It's just
[Guest]: been sent ahead. And you said VP was damn confused for a few hours. He didn't know who this was,
[Guest]: where this had come from. He didn't know. Random letters.
[Amit Varma]: This is also very interesting and I won't dwell upon it. I'll just ask listeners to go and buy
[Amit Varma]: the book and read about it. But you know, little tactical details of how individuals, the princes
[Amit Varma]: were brought into sway. For example, Manipur, where the king of Manipur fell in love with this
[Amit Varma]: young actress, but she spurned him. So he had her abducted and kept in the palace overnight.
[Amit Varma]: And the next day she marches to him, obviously angry that she's just been raped and demands
[Guest]: that he marry her. At which point the Maharani gets to hear of it and has hysterics. And this
[Amit Varma]: becomes a public scandal, which suits VP and Sardar Patel very well, because then they use it
[Amit Varma]: as leverage to make the dude sign. And you know, so all these other local factors, what is the
[Amit Varma]: timing that you pick and all of that coming into play. I'm, you know, what is also, I mean, we are
[Amit Varma]: recording this on Feb 17th and obviously three, four days ago, there was this big controversy that
[Amit Varma]: broke about Patel and Nehru and did Nehru sort of include Patel in his first cabinet or not?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, so before we get to that specific sort of this thing, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: what was the relationship between Patel and Nehru that VP saw? And was VP's telling of it
[Amit Varma]: colored by his obvious fondness for Patel? For example, you know, you write in the book,
[Amit Varma]: going all the way back to 1936, you write, quote, Jawaharlal's public persona was engaging,
[Amit Varma]: articulate, charming, and sophisticated. But Patel was not alone in deploring Jawaharlal's
[Amit Varma]: volatile personality. He was too radical, too emotional, too impulsive for the older man's
[Amit Varma]: liking. Patel tried his best to see to it that Rajaji, to his mind an older, more seasoned,
[Amit Varma]: and far less impulsive candidate, was made president of the Congress in 1936. But Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: did not hesitate. Jawaharlal was his choice and it was Jawaharlal who became president of the
[Amit Varma]: Congress, stop quote. And in 1937, Jawaharlal insisted that he should stay in the post while
[Amit Varma]: it had been shifting every year, basically. And you write, quote, the idea that Jawaharlal could
[Amit Varma]: be so nakedly ambitious shocked the austere Sardar. If this continued, it could have some
[Amit Varma]: terrible repercussions for the Congress. And stop quote. And a lot of this is also playing out in
[Amit Varma]: the 40s, where it is, in fact, Jawaharlal's impulsiveness and, you know, almost, you know,
[Amit Varma]: speaking without thinking of the larger consequences that drives, that deepens that
[Amit Varma]: wedge between him and Jinnah. And the thing is, what I'm sort of perturbed by is how we look at
[Amit Varma]: this relationship today. On the one hand, it is clear to me that Nehru and Patel, who was 14 years
[Amit Varma]: older than him, were very different people with different styles, and they had huge differences
[Amit Varma]: with each other. And at different points in time and different contexts, I find myself taking one
[Amit Varma]: side or the other. Absolutely. At the same time, it is also clear that they worked incredibly well
[Amit Varma]: together, that a lot of how independent India was shaped, despite Patel's early death at the end of
[Amit Varma]: 1950, was because these two men teamed up and they worked well together. And yet, there seems to me
[Amit Varma]: to be a tendency to take a hardened position on this today, because the dispensation and power
[Amit Varma]: today is trying to claim Patel as one of their own. And they have always demonized Nehru, despite
[Amit Varma]: sharing Nehru's centralizing impulses. We are in a situation today with certainly on social media,
[Amit Varma]: it's Patel good, Nehru bad, or the other way around. And you cannot make any other argument.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And you face the brunt of this, when you mentioned in your book, how VP had related a
[Amit Varma]: story about Patel being kept out of his, Nehru's first cabinet, and then VP got word through to
[Amit Varma]: Mountbatten that this won't do. And Mountbatten had a quiet word with Jawaharlal and Patel was
[Amit Varma]: put back in. And none of this would have been documented. It's all people talking to each other,
[Amit Varma]: so to say. But VP talks about it in the oral history he has left behind. And Mountbatten
[Amit Varma]: later on when Hudson gets in touch with him says, yeah, I remember something like that.
[Amit Varma]: And the evidence against this is supposedly the letter which Nehru wrote to Patel telling him,
[Unknown]: you are the giant of my cabinet and blah, blah, blah. And the thing is, both of these could be
[Amit Varma]: true or they could be a bit of truth to both of these and we don't really know and it's all gray.
[Amit Varma]: But somehow it almost seems as if we have to take a hard stand against it. And as a recipient of a
[Amit Varma]: fair amount of trolling in the last few days yourself, what do you feel about it?
[Guest]: I think it's, frankly speaking, I think it's a shame because honestly speaking,
[Guest]: it's very easy today given the political times to remember that actually Nehru and Patel were
[Guest]: members of the same party at one point, right? In fact, at all points. Yes, they had disagreements.
[Guest]: And who doesn't when you're actually working together and you're working under moments of
[Guest]: immense pressure, you're working under situations that none of us can understand, right? Because
[Guest]: none of us are forging a country that are unique. They are moments in time that demand things of
[Guest]: you that you did not expect. Are you liable to have disagreements under that kind of pressure?
[Guest]: Of course you are. As you said, Nehru and Patel were very different men. They had very different
[Guest]: perspectives of how India should move forward. Would that also have given rise to disagreement?
[Guest]: Yes, it would have. And yet, as you say, and I agree, both of them worked very well together.
[Guest]: I think one personality was necessary to sort of anchor the other. And that works across the board.
[Guest]: You can't have two volatile personalities in power, otherwise there will be a certain implosion.
[Guest]: Patel was pragmatic, Nehru was not so pragmatic. Is that a bad thing to admit? I don't think so.
[Guest]: I think, and this is a point that I keep trying to make with my research, human nature is all
[Guest]: shades of grey. A lot of the foibles of human nature contribute towards making history. Without
[Guest]: those foibles, there would be no history. Am I refuting any of the evidence that's been presented?
[Guest]: No, I'm not. Yes, those letters exist of the 1st and the 3rd of August 1947, but you can interpret
[Guest]: history differently, right? It could have been written even after the conversations happened,
[Guest]: for example. It could have been written. You know, VP Menon was somebody, we have to remember,
[Guest]: this was 1947, right? VP Menon was somebody who was operating also under immense stress. He was
[Guest]: also equally somebody who was very much trusted by all stakeholders, the British, the League,
[Guest]: as well as the Congress. He had informants in the media, he had informants in politics, he was
[Guest]: trusted for the kind of information that he could pick up from his contacts and relay, which was
[Guest]: potentially game-changing for politics as it stood at that point. And politics at that point was
[Guest]: incredibly fluid. Politics at any point is fluid. Back-channel talks take place all the time in
[Guest]: diplomacy and politics. Back-channel talks are very rarely documented neatly. Today, we have
[Guest]: archival evidence is the only way in which we can actually constructively reconstruct our past. We
[Guest]: have no other way of doing it. But in doing so, I think we shouldn't forget the fact that these
[Guest]: were events happening in real time, none of which was cleanly documented. If it was, there would be
[Guest]: no politics involved, there would be no history either, right? Because it would just be very easy
[Guest]: to construct one single linear narrative. A lot of the reasons why history remains subjective
[Guest]: is because it has a lot of grey areas, most of which are contributed to by human nature.
[Guest]: I also feel like it's easy today to say that O. V. P. Bheran was Sardar Patel's right-hand man.
[Guest]: So, you know, by the 1960s, he had a lot of antipathy towards Nehru. It's very easy to say
[Guest]: that and dismiss it. I think that it's wrong to do that because there are others also on record.
[Guest]: I have quoted Iyengar, whose oral history is left at the Murthy, quoting several incidents in which
[Guest]: several incidents in which Nehru was capable of immense pettiness. For instance, when Sardar
[Guest]: Patel died, Iyengar was Home Secretary at that point. And he goes to Nehru and says,
[Guest]: can I be part of the flight that's going to Bombay? And Nehru says, no, there's no room for you.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Nehru barred O. V. P. from attending Sardar Patel's funeral. O. V. P. went anyway,
[Guest]: of course, but that's staggeringly petty. That's staggeringly petty. It's also an
[Guest]: incident that was recorded, you know, in a separate interview I did with S. V. Raju,
[Guest]: who told me about this incident also. But you know what? It's not a shame to admit that the
[Guest]: greatest leaders that India had were also capable of human pettiness and human vice.
[Guest]: I think as soon as you forget that, and as soon as you take a hard stance on one was good versus
[Guest]: one was bad, and you can't say anything against either party, I think that's something that needs
[Guest]: to be put aside. Otherwise, it becomes a problem in writing history. It becomes a problem in
[Guest]: studying history as well. You can comprehensively change history by taking a hardened stand on any
[Guest]: of this. You know, just because V. P. Menon did not leave behind any documents as to this, just
[Guest]: because there are no documents that today attest to this, does not mean that it did not happen.
[Guest]: Very rarely is politics so neatly documented. Do we ignore oral histories too much?
[Guest]: I think we do. I think that's something that needs to be looked at more closely.
[Guest]: We tend to rely heavily on letters, on correspondent diaries. We tend to not take
[Guest]: into account oral history. I like oral history simply because when a person is recounting a
[Guest]: memory, a person is then talking about it completely free of any, you know, constraints
[Guest]: that might be holding him back. They're not crafting a sentence and all of that.
[Guest]: No, they're not. These are people who've left government service, right? They've got nothing
[Guest]: to prove and nothing to lose and nothing to gain equally, right? So their memories will be that
[Guest]: much more unadulterated by constraint, right? They were speaking freely. It's all right to
[Guest]: admit that Nehru had pettiness and spite. It's equally all right to talk about the foibles of
[Guest]: any of the great political leaders we've had. We need to start looking at oral history as an
[Guest]: important primary source when we're writing history, rather than dismissing it as mere hearsay
[Guest]: or gossip or indeed dismissing it as rumours. A country could be made or broken on the whim
[Guest]: of a rumour in those days. Even in these days, you hear the slightest rumour at the highest channels.
[Guest]: Action will be taken based on the veracity of those rumours and the veracity of the person
[Guest]: who's bringing those so-called rumours to you. So information in real time played a key role
[Guest]: in politics and still does in politics and diplomacy. I think we shouldn't forget that.
[Guest]: Oral history as well as real-time information are both key factors in constructing a history
[Amit Varma]: of our past. And one of the interesting things to remember is that in all the histories I have read
[Amit Varma]: of the period and indeed in your book and the episode I did on Kashmir with Srinath Raghavan,
[Amit Varma]: one thing that comes through is that much as a Hindu right today is trying to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: co-opt Patel into their pantheon, which is funny because he banned the RSS. The thing is,
[Amit Varma]: on the issue of Kashmir, Patel was the one guy who was actually happy to do a plebiscite there,
[Amit Varma]: who was happy to consider the practical option of let the Muslim majority parts,
[Amit Varma]: including the value of Kashmir, go to Pakistan. All of those were on the table for him.
[Amit Varma]: It was actually Nehru who put his foot down and who prevented sort of that from happening,
[Amit Varma]: which your book talks about, which Srinath has spoken about, which is there in the histories.
[Guest]: It's there in the histories as well. You know, there's so much that is there in history that
[Guest]: has been recorded, the controversy over the date of the signing of the instrument of accession in
[Guest]: Kashmir, which is also a subject I've talked about in the book. I have also talked about VP's own
[Guest]: stand of what should have happened in Kashmir, where he differed very greatly from what actually
[Amit Varma]: happened. Right. But he's the man who took the flight, went to Hari Singh, got the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: coaxed, rather the signature out of him, flew back and then India could send in. Absolutely.
[Guest]: And yet his stand was, we didn't give them a plebiscite and we should have. And that's one
[Guest]: area in which I think I have great regrets because I feel that we owed them a plebiscite. We didn't
[Guest]: give that to them. And that I think is a raw honesty, which should be commended, honestly
[Amit Varma]: speaking. Yeah. And I agree with him on that. And also I can't help repeating that it does seem to
[Amit Varma]: me that, you know, we quickly cobbled together an empire, sort of reassembled the empire of
[Amit Varma]: the British empire and made a lot of false promises along the way, including to Kashmir
[Guest]: and including to various other princely states. That is something also that VP and Patel have been
[Guest]: accused of, that they betrayed the princes, they took their legitimacy, they took away their
[Guest]: sovereignty and they basically left them with nothing. It, you know, from whatever I have read
[Guest]: from Patel's own letters, which are on record, and he wrote several strong letters on the subject to
[Guest]: Nehru. For them, it was a question of, they knew the fact, they knew what they were doing. They
[Guest]: knew that essentially these were very proud men. And by taking away, taking away their kingdoms,
[Guest]: they were essentially stripping them of a lot of the tangibility to which they tied their legitimacy.
[Guest]: Patel, for one, was incredibly aware of that, which is why the issue of privy purses became
[Guest]: so important later on. In fact, it became important from 1949 itself, you know, when
[Guest]: Nehru basically started looking at ways to slash the privy purse. And Patel gets really upset with
[Guest]: this and he writes a very strong letter and he says, look, we've taken everything from these guys.
[Guest]: Now for us to renege on even the barest minimum of the promises that we've left,
[Guest]: it would be incredibly unfair. And if we're thinking of doing that, then I don't think
[Guest]: that this is the way forward for an independent country, that we are being dishonest here.
[Guest]: And it's important to remember that these were men who acted with a view to bringing the country
[Guest]: together, yes, but also knew exactly what they were doing when they were interacting with these
[Guest]: rulers. They saw them also as humans and they knew that they were stripping them of whatever
[Amit Varma]: they had been associated with. And Nehru in this regard, you know, going against the core
[Amit Varma]: tenet of Gandhianism, according to me, was, you know, just thinking of the ends and not the means.
[Guest]: And, you know, to lie to someone and then to cheat them out of something is not how you
[Guest]: sort of... And yet there was a very concerted movement brought about by Nehru to actually
[Guest]: start with the slashing on this Privy Versus. And this was something that Patel got wind of,
[Guest]: and Patel didn't like that at all. I think that speaks volumes about both Patel and VP,
[Guest]: that you actually don't merely treat royal houses as, you know, factors to be integrated,
[Amit Varma]: you know, mere pockets of territory, but they're actually also...
[Guest]: And they're making sacrifices.
[Guest]: Yes. And these are two men who have no love for the princes, I might add. Patel was no great fan
[Guest]: of the princes, neither was VP, right? But... In fact, VP had been... One of them had pointed
[Guest]: a gun at him, Jodhpur. Jodhpur had pointed a gun at him. In fact, Jodhpur and VP went on to become
[Guest]: great friends. Jodhpur offered him a parliamentary seat. Jodhpur offered him a parliamentary seat
[Guest]: for the 52 elections. VP said no. But, you know, these were men who saw both the ends, but never
[Guest]: treated the means as simply the means. The means were also humans. It was important to act
[Guest]: honorably. It was important to act honorably. Though some could argue that there was a lot of
[Guest]: implicit coercion and threats. Of course there was. In fact, I've admitted that as well. There
[Guest]: was more than implicit coercion and there was more than implicit manipulation and machination.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, for these guys, this was the job that had to be done. And that was how
[Guest]: you basically had to get it done by whatever means were possible. You know, even when it comes to
[Guest]: Hyderabad, VP's own words are, you can say whatever you want, but I still think that it was necessary
[Guest]: to do what we did in Hyderabad. So these are men for whom the end was very, very clear, but they
[Guest]: did not lose sight of the fact that the rulers they were dealing with were also humans themselves.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. And your book, of course, details all this out very well. And then it goes on to
[Amit Varma]: sort of the post-Patel career. VP where he's first a governor somewhere.
[Guest]: In Orissa.
[Amit Varma]: In Orissa for a couple of months. And then he's part of the finance planning commission.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And then he moves on and later he joins the Swatantra party and so on and so forth. And
[Amit Varma]: then he dies in the mid-sixties. I'll just recommend that people read your book because
[Amit Varma]: it's an important part of your history and also sort of give me insight into how an individual
[Amit Varma]: can carry so much import. Like reading your book, looking at all the things that VP Menon did,
[Amit Varma]: especially in that period of time where Patel was ill or incapacitated or couldn't handle it.
[Amit Varma]: It's very hard for me to imagine what this nation would look like today if VP Menon wasn't there.
[Amit Varma]: Do you believe in the great man theory of history? You know, Carlyle's whole thing that
[Amit Varma]: great men shape history, or would you say that the currents of history are all sort of
[Amit Varma]: going in whatever direction they are and men just happen to be where they are?
[Guest]: No, I in fact believe in, I don't know whether it's the great man theory or not, but I do believe
[Guest]: that once your basic foibles of your personality have the power to shape history. So basically,
[Guest]: actions that are driven by your ego or your personality have the power to change the course
[Guest]: of events. Nations have gone to war for less, you know? So I, there is one particular sentence in
[Guest]: my book where I basically talk about, you know, Patel has died and VP is reflecting on the death
[Guest]: of Patel. And he says that, thank God, essentially that integration happened while Sardar was alive,
[Guest]: right? I think that is a huge testament to the fact that the integration of this country could
[Guest]: not have been possible without Sardar Patel. I think VP certainly believed that Sardar Patel was
[Guest]: a great man. In doing so, I also feel like that statement gives away a lot of his own tendency to
[Guest]: efface himself from that, because I also believe that Sardar Patel could not have done this without
[Guest]: VP Menon. I think Sardar Patel could have said the same about VP Menon. That's what I mean.
[Guest]: I think the same could be said about VP Menon also. And honestly, the task that they did,
[Amit Varma]: I cannot imagine someone like, say, Nehru for all his greatness. I mean, Nehru built so many
[Amit Varma]: institutions. We are secular because of him. Thank God Nehru existed. However, Nehru could
[Amit Varma]: not have done this. He was a completely different kind of personality. There were men with different
[Guest]: abilities and different capacities. And I think one tends to lose sight of that in this day and
[Guest]: age. And it's easy to lose sight of that perhaps in this day and age, but I don't think that that
[Guest]: should be done. I mean, Patel and Nehru were very different men with very different capacities,
[Guest]: right? Patel was somebody who could unify in different ways, right? Nehru could unify in
[Guest]: different ways. Patel could unify in different ways. Patel was incredibly pragmatic. His vision
[Guest]: for the future was crystal clear, and he knew exactly how to go about it as well. Nehru was
[Guest]: far more emotionally driven. He was somebody who was incredibly sensitive as well. He was
[Guest]: erudite, articulate, all of that. And certainly India needed somebody who was both eloquent,
[Guest]: articulate, and erudite given where she was going. But India also needed somebody who was capable of
[Guest]: very firm decisions and very cool-headed decisions, which Nehru was not capable of,
[Guest]: but Sardar was. In that sense of the word, I think he was a great deputy to have, because you need
[Guest]: someone like that to balance you out. It does not necessarily mean that it's a bad thing. I think
[Guest]: it's a very necessary thing to have somebody to anchor you and hold you down and ground you.
[Guest]: Sardar Patel was a very grounded, pragmatic man. We tend to lose sight of that now,
[Guest]: you know, because it's easy, as you said, to get lost in binaries. History was never a binary.
[Guest]: For me, it's not a binary. It's a very complex web and it's a very crazy sort of patchwork
[Amit Varma]: of intersecting personalities. Yeah, very wise words, especially now today,
[Amit Varma]: when history is often sought to be weaponized by politicians to serve their own purposes and
[Amit Varma]: narratives. Whereas, you know, you and I would both agree, and I think any sensible person would
[Amit Varma]: agree that, listen, Nehru and Patel were both great people. We're lucky to have them. And indeed,
[Amit Varma]: VP Menon, about whom I think more people should know, and they should buy the book. But I will
[Amit Varma]: now turn the spotlight on you. Now the book is over. What do you feel? Is there a sense of relief?
[Amit Varma]: How has your family reacted to it? Because that is VP Menon's family as well. And what's up next?
[Guest]: Well, I at the moment feel nothing but absolute exhaustion because this has been the last five
[Guest]: years of my life has gone into writing and researching this book. So I feel sort of
[Guest]: empty almost, like I've actually put out this work out there. I'm now talking about it, which
[Guest]: for me, it's always been easier to write rather than actually talk about it. But you know, even
[Guest]: when you put down VP Menon's words in the barest of the minimum words, it's still an inspirational
[Amit Varma]: story. It's still a story you want to listen to. I mean, this is a kid who dropped out of
[Amit Varma]: matriculate and burned his freaking school at 13 and ran away to work in a coal mine and went from
[Guest]: there to sell towels on the streets of Bombay. Yeah. And then went on to become one of India's
[Guest]: highest civil servants. Our finest civil servants. I will make a categorical statement even if you
[Guest]: won't. I agree. He was one of India's finest civil servants. He was India's finest civil servant.
[Guest]: My family has been very supportive during the writing of this. I don't think any amount of
[Guest]: information was ever hidden. And that especially contributed to writing about his personal life.
[Guest]: I think it's very difficult for not just me as a biographer, but for them as his
[Guest]: grandchildren to go over aspects of his marital life, about his second marriage, about, you know,
[Guest]: his foibles as a man. His emotional coldness. His emotional coldness, his emotional stuntedness.
[Guest]: I think it's difficult to put that down objectively. And they have. They've absolutely
[Guest]: been 100% forthcoming with all of his shortcomings. And I can't give them enough
[Guest]: credit for that because you need a certain level of honesty and a willingness to actually put it
[Guest]: out there. I think the problem with telling history a lot these days is your tendency to
[Guest]: sanitize, your tendency to eulogize. My family didn't intend on doing that from the get-go.
[Guest]: They knew that VP's personal life was complicated. They knew that parts of his professional life
[Guest]: was complicated as well with his fallout with Nehru. They also knew that me putting this out
[Guest]: in the public domain was going to be tricky given the political climate. I received no pushback from
[Guest]: my family about any of this. They're very, very willing. And I'm speaking also for family members
[Guest]: whom I contacted via Twitter. I met for the first time. There was no reluctance to volunteer
[Guest]: information. And honestly, I can't give everyone enough credit for that because it's a rare,
[Guest]: rare quality to actually be that open about somebody's shortcoming, somebody's career
[Guest]: plummeting, the reasons why that somebody's career plummeted. And this becomes even more
[Guest]: complicated because if you read the book, you'll also know that we are also, my nanny's sister,
[Guest]: brother married Nehandara Sehgal. So we are also connected to the Nehru family themselves.
[Guest]: So it is difficult on both ends, you know, because you're also then talking directly.
[Amit Varma]: So you are also an extended part of the Nehru family. Can you take over the Congress someday?
[Guest]: No, I would not want to do any such thing. So it's difficult because honestly, I had to keep
[Guest]: both aspects in mind. I have not, like I said, held back and that was completely with the support
[Guest]: of the Vapala side of the family, including my own mother and uncle, because we all felt
[Guest]: collectively that this was an incredibly important aspect of his career and it shouldn't be hidden,
[Guest]: including his personal life. It was a subject that's been raised many times.
[Guest]: Also, I feel that the objective of a good biography is to try and marry the public and
[Guest]: personal life. Well, if you can do that, and if you can present a good comprehensive or as
[Guest]: comprehensive as you can make it, portrait of a personality against the backdrop of the life and
[Guest]: times in which he lived, I think then you've succeeded as a biographer. And I can only hope
[Guest]: I've managed to do that with this book. No, you absolutely managed to do that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think what a good book of history should also do is deepen one's understanding of both
[Amit Varma]: history and human nature. And your book certainly does that. So thank you so much for sparing more
[Amit Varma]: than three hours in the studio. This must be another reason you're exhausted, right? First
[Amit Varma]: five years of writing and then ready to talk on a podcast for three hours.
[Guest]: Well, I've talked on several forums before this, not for three hours, I'll admit, but
[Guest]: I have talked a lot about the subject. So getting used to talking about VP. I'm getting kind of
[Guest]: excited about talking about VP too. Thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore,
[Amit Varma]: online or offline, and buy The Magnificent Biography of VP Menon by Narayani Basu.
[Amit Varma]: You can also follow her on Twitter at Narayani underscore Basu. You can follow me on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of the Seen and the Unseen at
[Amit Varma]: seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com. The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila
[Amit Varma]: Institution. Hop on over to takshashila.org.in for more info on their public policy courses.
[Amit Varma]: Who knows, you could be the next VP Menon. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: and thinking. Thank you.